# 250 Modern ＂Set Theory＂ - is it a religious belief system？

[music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger and today series moving into a very important topic where pure mathematics which is its over reliance on set ahead a little bit. In the math foundation series on doing on abstract algebra and I'm going to be. Now to embrace this very important challenge of facing and examining the details of what. So in this series so far we've put together I lot of mathematics correctly and logically from foundational issues and pretend that everything steadily and it's really instructive to do that. It us so in this spirit I want to now examine and I want to dismantle. It there's really really have painted ourselves into a corner a logically inadequate foundation for mathematics history.

We look at some of the people involved even from its early years we're going to look important aspect how is. It that a whole generation have managed to just not look in that direction. The logical structure that dominates the it is all about logical correctness and clarity to voice an opinion. In this direction or in that integrity of the arguments that are presented. All the public prosecutor and you can be the jury and case which will take quite a while to develop and a new and more solid view currently. We believe mathematics there is the foundation the foundation supposedly arithmetic geometry combinatoric algebraic jump.

All these subjects are built up not the way one should think about mathematics and. This where mathematics is built up with arithmetic arithmetic with natural numbers and from that combinatorics algebra analysis and. So on and part of mathematics is moved to its proper place there it's not discarded it's a very important and and. It shares space with multi set theory with we're also going to do which is a little with what. The computer scientists are doing this foundational point of view from modern mathematics our computers doing because. The computers are modern mathematics have to talk more at length so we want to sync with with computational issues to have something.

In this direction we're going to historically viable way of thinking about what want to give you an overview of. The situation some of the reasons for the difficulties that we the nature of. The continuum the line trying to a fundamental problem in my famous math problem. So there's a fundamental difference between the discrete is modeled by the natural numbers to and. So on are counting numbers and that's very must acknowledge that as we go. In that direction aproblem 'aa rise so this is not an ironclad in big arithmetic but at least up to a certain.

The story with the continuum is very different of problem that we do with. The discrete natural on going in that direction can we keep on going exactly happens. So that a subtle issue the same in the continuum we face this local problem page it's right. In front of us which is how do we and closer at the nature of. This line how do we and subdividing and looking more clearly and so. This is hugely problematic and one of the the it might be tempting to introduce things called from.

The ancient Greek times when you look at a there so the Greek side of. This diagonal that's but if we take that segment and we move it. So that we move it so that it's on our axis then we have segment of. The side of the square that we started the Greeks discovered and while. They expressed wasn't for them arithmetic 'el at all for us it irrational numbers. So we we believe that through that correspond to the length of such a and.

We want to believe in such irrational numbers we set up an arithmetic which incorporates not numbers okay. This is a hugely problematic it's of almost all of the difficulties ultimately ultimately with modern set theory too. So if we just a age or two we can say that difficulties knees were already apparent to. The ancient Greeks Euclid to try to minimize these difficulties and and 18th century. In the European development mathematics most of it motivated in in the real problems and. It was very powerful and after what is today usually called pure mathematics.

So were going back to the ancient Greeks which they of lost for a few thousand years and. Then in saying okay what exactly are we doing when we're got all these cool tools. We can solve all these foundation for what we're doing there how do. We up to us and so there were some efforts then eventually people realize that. It really came down the heart of things is how do we model calculus okay and eventually people said okay soup that up into a theory of real numbers okay for. This real number story which is really where difficulties lie and it's very important for feel it's necessary to justify what.

They do in the realization that we really have to address the systems that's really. The foundational issue it's really only in the last half of the 19th. This challenge and around the 1870s Dedekind and would rather say descriptions of so-called real. The arithmetic of real numbers and later we should get rational numbers squared away. They said well we should ponder a strange timeframe for these various in quotes of Dedekind and Cantor for irrational utilizing Cantor's new theory of infinite sets. So theory of infinite sets which caused a lot of mathematicians opposed this new theory Cantor felt under attack and.

It was it was a difficult time triumphed because of largely the support of David controversy. So around the turn of the century in well as to whether Cantor's theory of infinite adequate foundation for. This of real number of between all of this and the foundations of. Then unfortunately for this new theory disaster was discovered that there were major addictions developed and that was propounded by Hilbert embarrassing difficult time and analysts suddenly because. The theory of real numbers that had just sets and now infinite sets were found to be what's. The framework for analysis it a combination of factors including Hilbert's mathematical logic into into mathematics together axiomatic approaches to set theory were allowed what to call.

The sir Melo Frankel choice axioms was not really based on precise definitions and framework. So it was as if we we had abandoned the very carefully and clearly and said let's just. It was a situation let's assume that the kinds true and we're going to dress. This up as a as an was that the job of framing this. All in such a really philosophy is really a branch of philosophy of an exaggeration to say that mathematicians. The philosophers the Philosopher's of course were require their services they're going to come.

In ever since then mathematicians have in their we now have foundations up there but we're not really. Philosophy it's outside our rest of the mathematics that we're doing so agreement not to examine carefully what. This very unfortunate situation and it's in my view decades ago with the IBM and Microsoft. So IBM was fabulous little devices that had the computing all kinds of components from various operating system. So underlying software for their didn't do this themselves it was system for them and. It was really a fundamental somehow unimportant or relatively unimportant days we probably.

All agree that it's the software similar to what's happened in mathematics that creating proper foundations for. The subject so from actively investigating this situation it's you just believe what you're told you play along on doing sophisticated important mathematics view is exactly. The opposite okay it's exactly more and more complicated mathematics is much correct you get. The Foundation's correct then mathematics becomes a vibrant living thing instead so that's what. I want to move us towards but we're of course a major simplification but we're gonna looking at. It in some detail in our next video I how the story of.

Logic has risen from early development I'm.