# 270 The Boole Mobius transform

[music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in today's bull mobius transform which provides a magical poly numbers. I think this particular technology think there's any comparable object in the boolean really. I think cements the superiority of this orientation suitably interpreted of course in and algebras which I've presented ok. So what we going from a boolean function which is a function variables a 0 a 1 a 2 and. Then corresponding the usual way that we represent going through all our input functions and that's easily remembered there's 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 and 7 and that's going to be more clear as. We carry on so let's have a look at do what we do to get a corresponding bool opponent look at.

The zeros in this case there are fewer one have ones what we're going to do is we're going to. This row here has a 0 0 1 so we're going to write guarantees that. This thing will be a 1 precisely to the next row with a 1 which is 1 down here and. The last row a 0 a 1 a 2 note that a difference our input variables are labeled. In a different B and C all the time now we're making a a starting. The indexing over here ok so a 0 reason for that that's an important part which really rests on a binary understanding and just convert.

It to an algebra will we expand a 0 a 1 a 2 here. We get an a 1 a 2 and an a 0 a 1 cancellations these two cancel gets nothing else and. The single a 0 a 1 a 2 leftover so we've gone and we're going to think. Now about this as being something in this in this space it's really kind. In this space which is also an 8 dimensional space reasons that will become clear later. So the blue and giving us bool poly numbers and we want to way.

All right so this is going to be a just the specific examples that we've mostly been are firmly going to be using. The binary system how we count in binary there is zero there's one eight and. The meaning is that we're thinking about powers of two rather than the more familiar powers system. So here we have the two to the zero column and then the four is column. Then the eight corresponding to increasing powers of two so a times 2 to. The 0 plus 1 times 2 to the 1 plus okay 1 times 2 to.

The 6 for a total of 1 plus 2 plus 8 all right. So this is the binary representation of these things right so I want you to immediately 6 that's 4 that's 3 that's 7 that's 8 that's 2 variables. So well we have the variables a 0 a 1 a them in that particular order we're thinking of our labeling of. All the possible rows that really other words is the two to the zero column and. Then the a2 corresponds to the two to the two column ordering also allows us to to organize. The boolean same time so we get a consistent labeling across in that'll be very important for us.

So note we're on alright so you have to make the adjustment this is. The number two this is not a hundred and far we've looked at a lot of specific examples specific bula poly numbers or starting with bool poly numbers associated to them after you've inclination you start thinking okay that's. All of looking at specific examples what happens if very profitable line of inquiry. So let's a 2 here are the eight possibilities as usual a general fashion. So instead of having specific which represent these unknown values and look okay. This one is X 0 this one's X 1 this 1 X 2 representations of those numbers not.

The familiar X 11 this is X 3 because one one represents three. So each one of these variables corresponds to a now this thing is zero it's. One we have three input variables but we could easily do let's just note again. The subscripts zero to seven those eight possibilities and now things and impose our binary labeling for that. So input variables a 0 a 1 a 2 in that case a general consisting of multiples either 0. One of these a 2 over here okay or a 0 a 1 or a 0 a 2 or a 1.

He put the a 2 on this side usually we would first and. Then the quadratic terms and then the we're changing our view on the natural ordering important to understand is. So these various terms of the set a 0 a 1 a 2 you should think of spaces use my math foundations conventions unordered different subsets of. This going from the empty just the various encoding --zz of the various of. This also correspond to binary numbers 0 1 2 say this this number here is 0 1 well. The to well we think of these digits as corresponding the 2 so.

This number here is encoding the fact 0 2 to the 2 so it's picking out just. The the 1 so this corresponds to the 0 this corresponds 3 and. This one corresponds to 4 because 2 is is 0 0 1 that's. The number 4 that corresponds to so we're gonna make that more clear by. So we don't want to write these terms as a product different so I'm going to introduce. The little a's binary numbers from 0 to 7 in this case a 0 and 1.

This is corresponding to what I've been trying corresponds to this one a 1 corresponds to a 0 a 1 a 1 0 0 corresponds to a to pay 1 0 1 corresponds 1 1 corresponds to a 0 a 1 a 2. So what is the the to know what product of A's does that correspond well. We just look at the digits that's the that's the 2 to the 2 digit. So we're ticking this corresponds to a 0 a 2 so each position. In the AI from I equals 0 to 1 to 2 where the rightmost have a good stare at. This and make sure that you of the basic terms involved in a bool poly number poly number which is ultimately also indexed.

The same indexing that we have for our boolean some examples so we really understand very clearly an expression. In the little A's with the indices plus a 0 a 1 how would. We rewrite that using that's a sub 1 0 0 because a 2 corresponds to a 0 a 1 a 2 which does not have any a 0 does not 1 corresponds to a 1 1 corresponds to. The subset a 1 plus a 0 a 2 plus a 0 a 1 a 2 a 1 corresponds is an a 1. This one here a 0 a 2 corresponds to is an A - but there's no a 1 and. This one here 1 or we would say a 7 okay because we're to an integer up to 7 how about 1 plus a 0 plus well here.

We have 0 a zeros a single a 1 a single known as a 6. So in general a general bool poly variables it's a linear combination of. All these by the same labels as the actual terms the terms the coefficients are exactly. The same but we're with more variables well we would just add more that we'd have to add a a Y 8 x 8 and. Then a so note that if we agree to count in binary as more concisely that that expression by saying sub K a sub K have to course. So interpret this also write k equals 0 to 7 Y sub K a sub K with indices are going to be expressed.

In binary not as opposed to the 3 variable case well a similar exactly. The same so the setup that we have now case we don't have to really introduce any more. The subsets of this n element set a 0 a 1 up to k equals 0 to 2 to. The N minus 1 why it's ok a we can also write a bunch of ones and general form for a bool poly number as a linear numbers from 0 up to. The 1 less than the power of in binary these labels written in binary reduce. The abstraction let's look at a simple and working with these binary aspects and really function and a corresponding rule poly number.

So here's a little table with the various options our general outputs x0 x1 x2 and x3 with binary technology for creating a bool poly number usually that have ones beside them and write corresponding don't know which ones are ones. So we have to do that is we just write down the corresponding 1 plus a 0 times 1 plus a 1. If X 0 is 0 well this we get what we want 1 plus a 0 times 1 plus a 1 1 here and 1 plus a 1 because there's a 0 here 1 plus a 0 times a 1. The last line x3 times a 0 out as a poly number in. The usual a 0 and a 1 so 0 or a 1 is only found by multiplying that 1 by get a 0 by multiplying. This times this with a times 1 with the coefficient of x 1 and otherwise times a 0 how about just a 1 by itself.

We get a 1 a 1 we don't get an a 1 from that. We get X 0 plus X 2 times a 1 and finally the product. The X one appearing we get the X two appearing them appear there and. Now we can rewrite this preferred labeling for the various terms here so times a2 is a2 because. This term here as a subset 1 and finally a 1 1 times. All of these x0 plus for a 0 a 1 so this is.

Then a combination of a so let's put that information together here is a Buhl poly number that. We get y0 y1 y2 and y3 in boolean function that we started with x0 x0 plus. This is a very happy situation because it's as a vector as a product of. The input vector x0 with linear algebra which is something we love computation once. We connect with linear algebra theoretical understanding of how inversion works so this is great. So we just look at this vector certain matrix and that's the bike.

It tricks one that gives us that term one zero one zero that final term there. So this is then the two variable giving the vector Y and the effect is that y is 2 for two variables. So what's this telling us X are the entries of a general boolean function of. The corresponding bool poly number and this bool poly number in this case. We just apply or entries all right so as I explained in my once. We have linear transformation from some space and given by a matrix right.

The framework question so very often this situation this transformation how do you undo or invert. The question ok so naturally here's that matrix about the inverse because the inverse is going. The X's ok so the inverse of this matrix if you by hand because it's pretty simple. In this case the diagonal so finding the inverse is matrix 1 minus 1 minus 1 1 1 0 minus 1 1 minus 1 1 closely connected. They have nonzero entries one has some minus ones floating around exactly or over. The rational numbers but we're field b2 with just entries 0 or 1 that's really scenario 1 and minus 1 are.

The same one equals inverse to this t2 matrix is itself it's equal equals x times t2. Then because these these vectors and we're working in the algebraic framework of x equals y times t2. So the dual Mobius transform because usually finding inverses is painful and this is a very happy situation but it's example. So obviously we're interested how does when we take the step up to three variables gonna be very interesting but you have. Now an ok so this is a great place for you to spend a extend what I've done today from two variables to you will own. This computation you will understand really recommend that you do this but in any case.

Next video I'm.