# 271 Three variable Boole - Mobius transform

Good day I'm Norman Wildbergers in today's video the three variable case where. We get a pretty good a remarkable connection with important aspects of focus. So let me remind you where we are currently about a boolean function with two variables a 0 x0 x1 x2 x3 written. In binary corresponding to the terms of binary numbers and then we've seen that a bullet poly number first of. All in this fashion product a 0 a 1 with coefficients X 0 X 0 plus X 1 and. I also remind you that we introduced this sort in the bool poly number expression.

The a sub i's 1 is a sub 1 0 or a sub 2 and. This thing here is correspondence between these coefficients which we so that would be Y sub 0 y sub 1 Y sub 2 and Y exes is given by. This basic equation here where we y1 y2 y3 y4 there's the vector x1 x2 x3 and x4 by. This little 4x4 matrix now it's a matrix just it has ones along. The diagonal and there's there and if we call this matrix t2 then. It has the same except that there's a few minus signs mod two.

We get exactly the same matrix as the Mobius transform going from the Y's to. The X's transform going from the X's to the Y's so what general situation. When we have three variables into clearer focus what this matrix is and where alternately that there's a very beautiful. Now to set the stage for that I want to remind correspondence that. We get between integers and two variable situation here if we're counting of morph that into a correspondence with subsets like that. So how do we do that well we take the by adding some zeros on.

The left if necessary so stay the same now they all have length 2 but 3 and. Now we associate these two subsets of this temporarily ordered like that with. The a okay then these things here correspond to subsets of which elements. We should include so the 0 0 the empty set the 0 1 means we're including. The set just consisting of a 1 and 1 1 corresponds to this first of. All to correspondence involving a think about arranging so that the a 0 is on left ok.

So let's first of all have a look at the from 0 to 7. Now and subsets of this 3 elements corresponding triples where we've added some zeros three elements and. Then here are the corresponding and interpret the rightmost entry as telling us telling us whether a 1 is included or not and. The or not so this is the set a 2 this is a set a a 0 set. Now exactly corresponding to the numbers correspond to the fundamental terms that appear poly number. In this next out we're getting terms here we interpreted as being one.

This is cero a1 this is a2 this is the product a0 a2. The poly number it's just a linear combination of we've introduced this alternate notation for these. The convention that the subscripts here are going instead of writing a 0 a 1. We write a 1 1 instead sure that you're happy with this correspondence understand. We have three input variables a0 a1 a2 various 8 possibilities of zeros and ones for. The values x0 x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6 x7 and what we want number.

So we're doing it now in the general case bit more work but it's more instructive also going to be 0 or 1 that any. One of them could be one of them the first line x0 is multiplied by will be 1 precisely. When these 3 inputs are 0 the over here which is a 0 1 plus a 1 1 plus a 2. The so on down to x 7 x a0 a1 a2 so please check. If out thinking it as a polynomial or poly number involve any of those three is only obtained. In one one times this one times X 0 so X 0 is.

The only do we get an a0 term as a result well here. We this one that would give us a next 0 here also 1. We can multiply it by we get an x1 but there's coefficient of a0 is just x0 plus x1 what about here a 1 times 1 1. So there's an X 0 contribution has an a0 in it but over here there's an a 1 term. One so we get an x2 here no a 1 by itself here there's only x0 plus x2 times a 1 what about a 0 a. In the two variable case it appears here here we include the a two term let's have a look at a entry with coefficient x0 and.

It could also appear 1 times 1 so that will give us an x 4 also. So times a 2 that can have been here so a zero times a zero times a 2 times 1. Next one with x4 so a 2 2 x5 I'll leave you to check that with a 1 a 2. The three terms well they occur with every term X 0 expression of. The general rule poly number that this is very nice because now we can see a rather. The boolean function of the X eyes and these we rewrite that same expression instead of using and.

The subscripts so this thing here for example capital a 2 that's the coefficient of a0 a2 etc. So we now think of this as being a sum of YK a K K y3 y4 y5 y6 and y7. So that's Pleasant consequence number with these a z' with binary subscripts and. This three variable situation what we're and we're ending up with the vector of Y's here is is. The vector of X's just short a little bit so between them in terms of a matrix that multiplies read off. This matrix from this expression well this first column is just X 0 well 0 times out is y 1 that's X 0 plus X 1 Y 2 is X 0 plus X 2 y 3 0 plus.

The X 4 y 5 is X 0 plus X 1 plus X 4 plus Y 7 is. All of them so this is the corresponding transform matrix the bull mobius transform with by 2 cubed it's an 8 by 8 matrix which. However we to 7 rather than 1 to 8 now have a look at. This has ones along the diagonal in fact it has ones binary object really it's living. In the Byfield is algebra in the by field and it also has a. We were talking about earlier that's appearing there and there you see the original matrix that matrix is obtained from.

This top left corner in here and we repeat it right there and. We repeat it block of zeros I want to point out that that same about. The one variable case but you might think one variable case also has a matrix associated to 1 0 1 that's. The core matrix that in some to go from this little two-by-two matrix to. The you take this two-by-two matrix and you copy could even go back. One further and look at the then to go from the single matrix to.

The 2x2 you 0 there all right so that's what you do at each generate. This the family of matrices very we can even easily get a very big matrix giving still have to explain that that works it's a theorem. So we do have to touch we have to understand what the formula for. The meet some interesting connection with partially bool mobius matrix in the three variable case what want to understand what. The formula is for the IJ ourselves that we are really using a binary or. So we want to think about the the rows as being by also 0 up to 7.

So this entry here for example 4 1 0 1 is 5 that's not 4 or 5 position well. This theorem which I might call the bull Mobius matrix is it's either 1 or 0 it's 1. If I is a subset of and J are numbers from 0 to 7 what do. We mean by have an obvious mean so I have to explain this. I by remembering that we have a correspondence of our variable set a 0 a 1 a 2 ok I've just shown you before. So 1 0 1 that corresponds to the 1 a 2 remember the.

The entries here are telling right including a 1 next including a 2 after these labels with these subsets of a 0 a 1 a 2 set theoretical inclusion it's saying. When the of the set corresponding to J so for example with sets are a 2 &amp; a 0 a 2. Now is this set a subset 0 a 2 that's the reason why. This entry here is the 5 6 entry here is the corresponding set 0 a 2 a subset of a 1 a 2 no it's not. So 5 is but 4 is a subset of 5 that's why there's a 1 crucial and having. This correspondence between interpreting and understanding to getting this has all kinds of ramifications.

The upshot is for simplicity of this formula the fact that it close to computer scientists heart we're talking those subsets. This is such a simple and powerful a boolean function to the corresponding boola apply linear transformations. We can apply this and we have this beautiful ultimately very simple boolean function vector to. The bool polynomial this more fully and to see how this a little bit more of a look at partially ordered and we'll see how. The the Mobius function of the with this story so.