# 277 A Systematic Approach to Logical Deduction & the Boole-Mobius Transform I

Good day i'm Norman Wildberger in today's video this course on bulls logic where. I show you holy grail of propositional logic going back two live dates which is to find a mechanical or reasoning and i'm going to talk about. The have some exposure to now so this will be you that the technology works. In a rather more at situations where the premises of our argument complicated statements involving. Some variables about which we know more or less nothing so there they're each rather complicated and. Then there's this conclusion on the basis of these premises so is a or b implies c is equivalent to a yeah that's another.

One balls a equivalent to B implies this a and B or not C. All of that and B implies C okay each one of these is true. Then we're trying to so in this situation or more complicated and are not generally very simple it's a major inference rules or clever choices of identities pool provides us with a systematic approach to a purely mechanical mathematical simplification really of a propositional. Logic I think now the first step is to convert all the statements. The first premise let's call it X a or b implies C the logical connectives with their corresponding. The following bool poly number one plus a plus AC call Y turns out to reduce to a plus B plus C Zed turns out to be.

One plus B plus C plus BC plus very happily these are canonical objects anybody exactly. The same answers so we do not have the point of view which currently is. The framework propositional logic courses this is property that the results of simplification are same answer and. The conclusion of course we also plus C plus BC now I'm going to check X and. I leave y&amp;z for you as exercises see if you is to take. This thing and simplify it to get this to this we are now gonna have a look at.

The first to a so we want to replace all these connectives all know. I hope that that's the same as a plus that's a connective that. We haven't seen that much it's expressed as one plus C plus a let me just same. In other words both 0 or both 1 then their so if they're. The same we always get 1 on the the other one's 1 then. This sum is 1 and the total this logical connective okay and we still maintain to replace that ok.

So this implies this we write plus the product a plus B plus a B times 1 plus using Buhl reduction what do. We get ok happily cancels with the a plus B plus a B that dies and. So we just had a plus B plus a B times plus ABC and. Now we multiply by a so any times okay what are we getting here. So there's some cancel and I guess nothing else so we'll have is looking over here that is. The same thing as X or simplified it or expressed it purely in poly number it's.

In canonical form because all no powers bigger than 1 great so we do that for conclusions and. Then we proceed to step two of the this composit expression premise 1 times premise there are here implies. The conclusion ok so we equivalent of taking the ends of those we were. The third premise and so on and we're trying to and the way we're doing that is we're taking. It ok so this is just another expression in the number and we want to prove that that bull poly have any of these A's B's ABS ABCs etc just 1. This is a tautology that is then the end of our have shown that.

The premises really do imply the conceptually simple but in practice not a fair amount of work involved let's have a look we've managed to simplify. All of our premises premise why there's premise Zed now all expressed is our desired conclusion which we're calling. This second step is to prove that the composite that mean it means that. We have to take these also have to multiply by Z then we have to form an thing here. We have to evaluate it and hopefully generally in this situation is we want to example. If we take the left hand side the product we could do that by multiplying.

The x times the Y because this thing has five terms and this thing times five 25 different multiplications that. We reductions a lot of those things are going to end powers we rub them off and that will help with a to be done there and. When you do that you can all the other things have canceled so. This is the we can whenever we can we have some expression thing becomes. This thing here which is the new then leave it to use same thing. We expand it turns out that it all reduces to ABC so that is ABC implies 1 plus C plus BC ok.

Now that's very an implication so it's 1 plus the first term ABC what do. We get well the ABC here cancels with ABC times BC that's also ABC. So those two cancel beginning that's what we want that proves that the. The product of the three premises x y&amp;z does basically an arithmetic approach involving admittedly possibly. In a rather extensive format practice at their polynomial arithmetic by doing quite a good thing for high school students polynomial algebra. In their lives something for what I've just done you will I hope realize that propositional.

Logic because what we're doing ambition that really goes back to Aristotle and. The process of reasoning in a logical enunciated by some Leibniz dreamt about having resolving arguments and of course what we're doing orientation that George Boole laid out for us okay. He said this is the way that we move forward mathematical framework for modeling philosophical. In this purely mathematical context of course and looked at it and extracted what. I point of view but basically we're really try to find a purely mathematical method for been able to do. So in a nutshell what does it premises say p1 p2 there's n of them.

We replace all the arrows replace the ORS the ends we replace the conclusion also with a bool pawn captures. The idea that the product of the premises reduce this thing just using. The blue reduction then we have succeeded in our task and it's a memorization of prior clever identities or rules everybody can agree to. The end result is canonical a boo poly number either it's gonna be. One now this algebra of bool procedure for suitable for computers so computers computer at working with polynomial arithmetic it's. So the computer science community in the last to allow our computers to do.

This fundamental we could augment that great achievement by a few algorithms which I've mentioned to you before designed to very very quickly deal with even terms a computer can deal with that you can do. It especially when you combine it want to be incorporating into the procedures ok by hand. This can be owners this procedure that of all these premises ok so. If each of the especially if you have lots of variables you're that 10 variable thing by that 10 variable. So that can be a lot of terms even if you have there is a second method which I'm going fundamental problem. So I've already laid out the now a second method which is a little bit clever propositional.

Logic so what we're going to do is the logic gate story the electric engineering doing there and particularly we're going to be was. This really key cute transformation so it turns out that by exploiting that thing computationally a little bit better we're going to fundamental logical procedure for verifying and. Next video I'm.