# 272 Partial orders, maxels and Mobius functions

[music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in today's put it into a larger context connecting. It sets explaining the connection with the möbius to to generalize what we've been talking about. In framework for linear algebra so today's lecture most advanced talk in this little series on Bulls pointing towards further directions I'm not going. I want to introduce the idea of a partially a look at some. Some examples starting with this about the divisors of 24 the natural numbers that. They are partially ordered by divisibility so in divides another so 3 divides 6 and.

So 3 goes by this diagram something that's called a hassle interested in a particular transformation which and. So we could take this partially ordered about a function on the the actual elements or function say F which has values 1 0 2 3 minus 1 that function and transforming. It to another the transformation operator T on the on the right informally. The rule is that the value at any node at all the nodes which are less than or equal to here. We would look the corresponding values of which are less than this one or less than or equal 1 plus 3 plus minus 1 plus 0 plus 2 plus 1 and here is obtained. The 3 is obtained by 2 plus 1 the formula that describes this transform that ft of less than or equal to V where.

The less than or considering and then we sum F of Zed so. This is combinatorics and a fundamental question thing how do we recover the original function it's useful to label. The vertices in a consistent here was the original partial order set with. The of 24 but when we're working with this situation refer to them rather as. The vertices 1 2 3 4 5 6 that we're considering might be called x1 x2 x3 x4. We do that to T transform to get ft is the new now.

We have everything nicely organized indexed how do we get this vector Y 1 through y 8 from what. The procedure is we know that we have to sum matrix that we need to multiply. This vector by in say interested in in Y 7 how do we get Y 7 well and that would be telling us that. We need to but also plus X 7 and not x8 that's how. We get given by that first call so each one of these output. So in particular now we've touched base by multiplication by this 8 by 8 matrix.

So this looking at with the bull' Mobius transform and we in fact. We could ask this question of generalizing or putting what we're doing into of 20 for example here is. The matrix for again sum of all the function values which are less than let's call. This matrix T that's the one we've just this time with the original labels. The numbers I want to explain the relationship between this in terms of Y. We have to multiply by the inverse this matrix and here it is right here it's also an.

The diagonal but now there's zeros ones and minus entirely clear what the pattern is. So the formula the divisibility condition and if we're indexing then T IJ is 1. If I divides J and 0 otherwise divides 12 this is a 0 because 4 does not divide formula for. The inverse matrix however is quite original Moebius function came into being although but it's equivalent. So the formula is that the IJ J over I ok so we're assuming that. I divides J possible ones and now I'm telling you what the and what is.

This function of J over I well it's S if J over I is a product of s distinct primes ratio J over. I is a product of distinct products power prime factors and in that case. We either get an odd number of distinct primes so for example the 612 entry 12 over 6 is 2 2 has a single prime 1 to. The 1 so that's why this is a minus 1 there so 12 over 3 is 4 but 4 is 2 squared. So it has a say this one here for 24 24 divided by 4 and 6 factors. We get minus 1 squared that's why we get a comes from ok it's a number theoretical function.

The inverse matrix to this one so this matrix the divisors of 24 and. This matrix is capturing mobius function is the key the key element here of. This inverse matrix are so i've been talking better make sure that we. All know what that means ourselves to partial orders on natural numbers to imagine. So we have a set you can think of it order is a relation typically denoted something curly less than or equal to to distinguish. It any two elements in the set which has three than or equal to a.

The reflexive property the or equal to B and B is less than or equal to are. The same and the transitive property if a or equal to C then a is less than or equal to C. So use the usual less than or equal relation given or equal to 1 less than or equal to 2 less than they're. All exactly in sequence it's almost like an example of a partial order another example which we've already talked about. In the context of divisors generally on the natural number so the or a divides B. The usual notion of divides that most pertinent for our discussion is the inclusion on sets typically.

All the subsets of a set of a given set say s now to be specific simple are. Then eight subsets and then the relation B and then here is the diagram that represents. The total set at the top and over here we see the elements and these bonds represent. When we have nicer to encode this a little bit more efficiently each. One of these three elements is included or of the order as being with a zero on. The right would represent the set a zero a zero is included this diagram and.

Now it looks like this with these from the empty set up to. The full set now as we've strip away the unnecessary zeros to the left of binary numbers from 0 to 7. In that same diagram here as just the number 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 and 7. So or labeling of the elements of our post set and is occurring. In natural numbers we started with it into a partially ordered set of just numbers using linear algebra notation because. We have an out that this inclusion partial order this picture in a bigger way by adding more.

We added an a4 then that would allow us to extend 0 out to 15 you might like to think about what have these different partial orders that. All a single partial order on all of the natural ok so now. I want to look specifically at what example where we have subsets of a 3 element set 3 inputs where we're working over. The integers a look it's a very interesting new notation will this is. The relation T that's represented by a 3 element set and so just to remind you here or less. The numbers from 0 to 7 in binary but the columns and the IJ entry of.

This thing is J and 0 otherwise so for example this one here entry here is 1 1 0. So how can we tell whether very simple because in order for this sufficient that. All of the entries here be here so if anything is included here say a two well and. This thing here why is that not a one 1 0 no it's not and. We can see that because the equal to the 0 entry here on. The right so this is so the matrix T which is really the bool Mobius 8 by 8 matrix form that we've already had a look is over.

The integers so if you just think of this brain trees and ask your computer to find its. In a rather novel way I'm introducing this new negative sign I am NOT a fan of minus 1 or minus. All used to that but if you think rationally about then there's confusion between. The negative this causes young people in primary school a lot this important issue. In my elementary mathematics the idea that we should introduce a more accountants already do. This they have things in but mathematically this is quite nice because if you have to write.

This out with minus signs and because things are no longer aligned so nicely copying. It and then judiciously putting bars that this inverse matrix is the same as. This in my science being represented by the bars and ones get minus signs and which ones don't well. In this context so it turns out there's mobius original mobius function was for. The divisibility of the second example and here is the formula 1 or minus 1 or 0 it's minus 1 to. The number I if I is a subset of J and 0 otherwise.

So for 0 here and 1 1 0 this thing has one entry as a difference between 2 and 1 is 1. So we should have here because this thing is not a subset of that a subset of that. So we how about 1 but do we have 1 here there's a total size of 3. The difference is so once you see this formula you see immediately Tamar to is as. I claimed in the last lecture if we restrict ourselves to a mod 2 formulation formula for T inverse is exactly. The same as J and 0 otherwise because mod 2 minus 1 is.

The I really shouldn't put minus 1 here I should while to shift your mental gears but ok 1 bar ok. So that's a nice story and that general formula works with more than three variables. So this with larger number of variables the bool Mobius you reduce mod two going to be given by. The what happened in the divisors of 24 case ok the this partially ordered set consisting of subsets Mobius transform to have. This beautiful symmetry I want to just go a little bit briefly in more. This circle of ideas might extend to more general the basic framework that we've been talking about are very interesting enriched objects.

So this is I want to advocate that probably the most optimal incidence algebras of partially ordered sets optimal way is to employ. The Maxell approach to the math foundations series that turns out to be here. In a very direct and conceptual combinatorial over that it's not meant to be comprehensive. So 166 to 172 that talks about Maxwell's and vexos a simple example of a partially ordered set which. So have a look at this little partial it said it's in a nice way and here are. The relations so 3 is lead to the 4 there's no relation between 2 and 5 refer to.

The partial order with the curly kind we can think about a set of pixels okay what's a numbers say. I J where IJ are in the post set so restricting ourselves to. The pixels which have what do those pixels look like well here's the of diagram. The labels here so this would be the 3 5 is in the set because 3 is less than or equal to. The fix P for this P now the whole framework revamped into Maxell language by introducing. The pixel KL is either the pixel I L in the case don't get anything ok.

So that turns multi sets so Maxell is a multi set of pixels and. Then we support in pics of pain so the maxis that have closed little algebra. So because of the beautiful that's exactly the consequence of the partially K and K is less than or equal to L. Then pi will be so we get a nice little algebra of of pixels max that algebra it's. The Maxell that has a 1 in each call that the zeta Maxell of. The partial order that combinatorial issues and a natural question in the Maxwell world well here.

It is there's the instead of minus ones and we might call this. The of the zeta Maxell and in this case it turns out also 1 bar there and there and otherwise. It let's say in the same places where this one is our partial or it's. It that forms an algebra now multiplication but crucially under multiplication little fact that. If M is a Maxell in this max'll and it happens to be invertible ok. In the world of which is invertible then the inverse is about what.

We mean here so we're really to say have rational coefficients now that might keeping with. The usual linear algebra another that allows us to extend ok to to break. The dealing with matrices of a fixed size and the well with matrices of bigger size. So with Maxell arithmetic smoothly and coherently across the distinction so anyway the unbounded aspect of variables. So for example instead of having up our bull Mobius transform that that have more variables you can have four variables. We about having an unbounded of Arabs we just imagine up to some limit that.

We cannot see we don't have to it beyond where we can say but. We can have a mathematics that consistently deals with situations so in other words we're including. The up getting things like this where we think of the as being just initial top left segments. The four by four matrix that we've talked about with a zero down here. Then you get the eight here's the two by two here's of one but. One and just keeps on going so this is like an on Maxell of.

The advantages in thinking about things from about this and on some other occasion I'll go into electrical engineers computer scientists who do. In the the more theoretical connections with this so I want to I want to just emphasize that. This is doing that connect with lots of other things great we had. Now a lot of experience understanding of what's going on with logic gates closer. In the original direction of bools to propositional logic going back to Aristotle logicians. We want to be able to apply in propositional logic typically philosophy also.

The interest to electrical engineers and not be separated from the discussion about us more insights and more tools for. Logic next time I'm.