# 273 Propositional Logic and the Algebra of Boole

Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're going move towards understanding that in a very novel we're. Now quite familiar with so it will turn the propositional logic story and. The electrical are also some interesting differences that I engineering story so historically propositional mathematics but rather. Philosophy and it has its kinds of reasoning historically the origins go philosophers. In ancient Greece in particular to philosophers that are more in the direction of. The logic deals with here's an example of the kind interested in making.

If the first then the so what does this mean so it's referring to. The second and the point is that we don't really those propositions we'll just call them. The first us that there's a relationship between the first the first proposition is true. Then the second we know and then the statement but the first first proposition is true. This but can be therefore the second so if P implies Q and P holds and here. It is in a a formulaic approach Q so now here we're introducing.

This symbol sort logic and we have this symbol here the implies want to give you an overview an introduction ultimately. The aim of replacing a lot of that with it's not important for us to get an extensive. Logic because we're going to be replacing most shortly here is an example of a classical. Logic Lewis Carroll who wrote Alice in Wonderland and it's in the form of a certain number of. Then there's a conclusion which you want to to accept no interesting poems are unpopular no poems are on soap bubbles no affected poetry. Now this statement of course involves some of the statements here are disguised direct meaning is.

So that's part of the trick words that are being used here and. So there's and so on but the idea is that even if we are is or what an effect ation is or what a look at. The bare bones skeletal logical structure and there's a fun little exercise you might like I'll give you a hint and has something to do with propositions which are involved here is. In some the relationship between these propositions this idea that there's true and false out there false. Now this is really more of a philosophical mathematical orientation it's it's philosophy we're investigating here. So propositional logic very simple statements or sentences which are propositions or sometimes formulas by.

The use of our basic propositions be say capital P capital fundamental relations between them and these and equivalent. So P and Q P is a proposition propositions like a compound proposition created or not P or P implies Q or P is equivalent to. We use in propositional logic to create bigger so if we go back to Carroll's puzzle. Then you can little propositions and we can give them names interesting M stands for. It is modern y stands for it is affected s is it is on soap bubbles and that. We wrote down for Carol's puzzle amount to it's interesting then it is popular M implies means it's not free from affectation and.

So on if here's some knots if it is affected then it is s. If it is not modern that is ancient then it encoding efficiently almost mathematically. The from these atomic ones that are the ingredients is to find a interesting conclusion for. It so now various connectives like and' and or' implies of propositions so. We suppose that our atomic and moreover that they can be assigned the true. This one is false that's important conundrums associated with this we're not false philosophers can debate that for years and of true and false and that we're able to assign a assumption that we're making.

So true is is represented by a capital F and then here are terms of. The values of P and Q and this will of story so the various possibilities for P and both false P could be false and Q could be true P both be true and. Then we define P and Q that is be as record here if both of these are false. Then is true then it's still false it's only true and here is or which you will recognize as an inputs are true it's only false. When both inputs P is just the negation so if P is false. Then not here is the implication relation P implies Q going whether this is a valid capturing of what anyway.

This is the definition that we're going and Q is false then P implies Q is true. So false the only one that's not true is true implies false something that's false that's. The meaning of this can just think that this is just a definition of to. This combination in terms of the truth values true when they're both false or. When they're both equivalence is false this is obviously story that we'd be talking about with circuits but different although we'll see that. The mathematics because then we'll be able to apply the algebra really going on here.

Now propositional logic but then wants to build up compound or composite with these various connectives or logical a new proposition which is not an atomic. One propositions that have been established somewhere brackets here so there's a big bracket here well it's a and between. This thing and between new proposition and P implies Q so the cumulative. This then is a composite proposition and Q and R what are the possible truth values of s. We start out is to create a truth table and it's doing with circuits here R P Q and R and here truths and false to those starting with FFF and just write down. The corresponding truth values so we can do this all at once with a little Q implies R ok.

So we're going to go through each so F and F false and false. If P is false and left-hand side here will be false false implies implication false implies false is true. So the inputs and in fact you can check that they're all the left-hand side would be P and Q. So that'd implies false that's the one situation where there okay these are simpler. This ingredient here false implies false yes true false implies true false true implies false false true applies true R. Now we're looking at these two false implies will be automatically true and true implies false false false and true implies true true ok great.

So do that so what is s S is this cumulative thing and asking does that imply. This ok so let's do imply true yes it does so in other words that's. The same so they're all true ok well but the next imply false right because. We have to take the one so the end of these ones is false does false false does false. If by true true again another true imply true that's true so we see something. This is a compound proposition that turns out to values of the ingredients are.

This is a special of like a theorem in the propositional logic definitions will say that a composit proposition tautology. If it is always true so that example was a tautology it's always true independent of will say that. It is a contradiction if it is if it is sometimes true if there's at least. One are the standard definitions but for me I need to of the other case what do. We call something name for that and so I'm proposing that we call debatable. If it's not true all the time it may true all of the time it's at least.

One time where some other terminology for this use that these are special to to identify these tautologies are especially. They are special things which are which but the satisfiability story is also important for. Logic circuits now creating a truth table propositional formulas to find out where because. If the number of ingredient propositions they're going to need 2 to the 10 rows to go truths that. We can assign to these 10 things so that you have is a serious obstacle to dealing but nevertheless. This is a tried and true method by making truth tables so that.

We understand and how they work out now what about when we have there is that. They are equivalent precisely when no matter what the input truth values are. The two the same values another way of saying that is to equivalent to T precisely. When the outputs are to T but F is not equivalent to take. So another in terms of this bigger compound proposition true always being true is that it's a tautology understand. Some basic tautologies that appear able to replace certain expressions with other some examples of important such equivalences that.

Some proposition and here is f that refers to the column of F's. If we have s and F well equivalent to s and S or T is equivalent to t to s. Now I have to say just a little bit about these operations you can see here. I hope that equivalence so this is interpreted as having but we don't want to have too many brackets. If we don't have brackets then especially like this the here we have s and s is equivalent to s and s is equivalent to t and s and s or RT is s and T and R is equivalent to s and T and R or s basic logical relations or equivalences that allow of thing appears. Then were able to replace it truth values that's what this equivalence means.

So logic and classical propositional logic to aims that one has all right. So the equivalences here are some more important equivalences which other ones i've shown you and. If you're taking all these under your belt ok so here we have. The already in the context of circuit analysis where or s and R or T and. The same thing with the ORS R and s or R and T here are de Morgan's a I'm putting. The brackets here so this is how we we have something like this without brackets.

It s is equivalent to not not R and not s this one's of. The implication in terms of an or so R applies just a double negation not not R is equivalent of. This not R implies s is equal to R and not memorized if you were taking a propositional. Logic you would use to simplify complicated expressions engineers use when they're simplifying boolean technology even though really. This came first the direction of what bool was really doing when was really trying to bring out. The mathematical been interested in that going back to the us to systematically even mechanically of streamlining reasoning.

So it to be honest with of propositional logic even though it may appear. It is ultimately quite ineffective is really directed towards namely systematizing one of. The reasons is that this entire framework propositions and it doesn't address the critical a dramatic simplification to think that typically you only get either true or false. In math.max any other discipline there's always some a little bit more true depending is etcetera okay and. Then the issue of what the social policy or politics or religion or whatever whose meanings are crucial to. The argument so of the words in the arguments then you're never arguments.

If you're not a philosopher I okay is a very limited value for solving and and reasoning processes. In fact I surface when it was discovered that the underlying electronic circuit story that is what really gave technology could be almost verbatim applied to of. The killer application of all this not on individual problems and puzzles and. In the all rather specialized and not of great general interesting discussion so to summarize. The formulas in propositional logic fall and just systematically writing down all the or substitutions based on these boolean talking about these equivalences are like boolean complicated complicated formulas hopefully into another technique which uses inference rules which going to be three quite independent approaches to simplify or to reduce complicated expressions up with valid reasonings valid deductions be subsumed by. The algebra of bool okay that is three are vulnerable okay and each of them orientation.

So I don't in fact want people to gonna subvert all of that and put. In place a much know courses in propositional logic we're going to that discipline that's what we're aiming these things here. So in our next video I want to to basically avoid truth tables and. The boolean and substitutions a very powerful new this established theory I hope you'll join me for.