# 274 Replacing truth tables and Boolean equivalences

Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in today's classical propositional logic with a more powerful going to be looking at today. In particular is --is in the reduction of propositional logic so last time. I gave you a very brief overview and is concerned with real-life statements that true be represented by T and false represented and equivalence that's. The framework of reasoning now the algebra bool is a much more Bull's original papers suitably interpreted. So in algebra B 2 to the N so we're thinking of vectors structure is given by addition and multiplication. So arithmetic Li the the situation is very simple to embed propositional logic.

So we are going to and embedding it inside the algebra pool and. This have the effect that it really restructure the sometimes also in mathematics departments aren't a framework that really allows educators exciting new ways and provides new opportunities interesting subject. So let me quickly review have basic propositions P and Q and they have various four combinations and. Then here's the here's the definition of P or Q represented by an inclusive or. So it's true all the time unless one is false all the time unless both ingredients negation of P. We have the implication P implies Q is false the equivalence between P and Q which and.

Then we can also think about the constant true they are also useful. We just call them F and of propositional logic these various connectors false. Now to move towards freeing the discussion subjectivity having to do with true and false true with. One so we want to recast the subject philosophical one so we're to disassociate. The or otherwise of true versus false and we no longer proposition so. We don't have to struggle with what P and Q as atomic objects which can take on.

The which the algebra pool exactly models for us so I'll abbreviate with PL not to be confused with to embed. This into the algebra of bool and so zeros and ones but whenever you see a zero you you want to but you don't have to ok here. Then usual 0 0 0 1 1 0 and 1 1 and now here are. The vectors in the bool algebra multiplication and we just take the product of these two elements mod plus Q. So in the algebra bool these are the two are defined in terms of them. This one notably is not a 1 if we want to recover the usual inclusive.

The sum of this one and this one and we get 0 here is. The bool poly number for that P implies to think about it in. The algebra bool as 1 + P + get 0 you add 1 to get 1 had these you get zero get zero here you get 0 add. One you get one right what in the propositional logic story is called P plus Q is. The negation of the addition the are not equal this one then is. One precisely of P expressed in the language of the algebra I'm going to.

Now start thinking about these operations in the algebra of bull and now. If we story we just have to connect the propositional existing here already. In our algebra of bool we're calling P times Q P or Q is. The same as Q that's the same as this one P equivalent to Q. This one so this way we can embed our five basic what about. This one here there's a gap here and various ways the most obvious thing to do propositional.

Logic story the exclusive-or could would leave it empty because it's not time want to connect. It with our boolean algebra from the algebra bool notably instead of having. Some cube which is our name for the inclusive already talked a lot about. The main operations negation which is with a bar over it and here just diagram representations of these various things cone here's. The XOR gate that's that operation XOR which is the X nor has a little circle there inversion or. The not operation so we are with the incorporate propositional logic by making these algebra by having these associations and naturally giving algebraic representations of these basic.

The idea is simply that we want to deal with convert everything to. The more fundamental the calculations there which is just grade 9 is mod 2. So we're looking at a couple of examples these various frameworks so I'm going to start is. This one here P or q and r is equivalent that first of. All this is true we can create a of basic technique that we learn to verify. The so here are P Q and R the various inputs here trues and falses to them and here.

Then we're going here so I've copied P here is Q and R. So Q and so there's a false here these are all false this true that's that. One there and then P or F and the rest are T's because there's a theis to. Now these two and that's going to be false here true there and true for. The other ones now now have a look at this left-hand side where. We this little term here and they're connected with is f F where T is T T or F is tea tea tea tea.

If to connect these two with an and so we're usually get F F F here they're both true through both stage here at. This term which is represented by term represented by this intermediate column in that's telling us that these two propositions are. Now if we want to do that more formally what we in here and. Now treat it as a single expression expression to do that we would have to compare is. The blue over here with a net value this thing equivalent to false that's true FF true FF true. All true also the net result is that the whole that means that.

This statement is always true that's our favorite expression it's always then a powerful mechanism because. We know now that they're equivalent so this is the truth table of. This expression let's have a look at the same using boolean identities now unfortunately. This usually considered a fundamental rule of identity identities so that doesn't get us very. This thing so now let's switch to the algebra of let me remind you how you convert. So the and here so this is represented by QR and this or here is a here there's an or that's a circle sum and.

This way of becoming an algebra bull expression it's because it has these circles sums. In it so our this is an identity in in the algebra book. We want the left hand side P Circle some Q R how do you first. One you add the second one and you add the circle that okay that's. The left-hand side now Q times P circle some are there's P circle. Some Q plus R plus P R we now have to multiply these P times P is P P times R is P R and P times.

This P we get Q P plus Q R plus Q P R and. Now we multiply plus the product of these is another PQR okay for example these two will cancel. This QP will we're left with P plus Q R plus QP R which is hand side. The left hand side equals the right same that's the meaning of the equivalence. In the as bool poly numbers are equal equivalence is just let's look at transitivity of implication which is R that implies that P implies R. If P implies the meaning of the statement so a truth table possibilities here is.

The implication P implies it's only false when the first one is true and here false implies false true false implies false false it's automatically true but here. We have false false true implies true true and true okay these ones you can check and P implies R we're. So now let's complete the story we now true remember and is true only. If both of them are true true that's true false and true false false okay. Now let's have a look at this left hand side false false true that's not quite. The same as the saying that they're same we're saying that this story by putting.

In the missing connective the to evaluate whether these guys do imply implies true true false implies true true true false implies true true false implies false true is only false. If you have true imply false and we we see that happily we get a whole bunch of truths tautology. The happiest situation so this is then a are so that's dependable we can use. It then in true in some special situation this one's always this result establish. It by using replacements or and on the web I've found some examples of that too complicated for me to happily describe them boolean identities with a few inference first of. All point out that this particular name it's sometimes called hypothetical syllogism of standard format.

This is very important kind a number of statements which are written on underneath. It is a conclusion the interpretation the premises so we're supposed to assume. The truth Q and Q implies R if we assume those two things let me give you. The proof from Wikipedia found there of this hypothetical syllogism and just want you to see. It okay I want you to see P implies Q and Q implies R and stated that. This is where we're starting we're starting with this deductions and hopefully at.

The end of it this that's this the scope of the argument okay what something pump material implication P implies Q is to not Q or R. So when we get working we with ands and ORS and make patience okay and. Now property because here there's a an and and here and the not Q or. This thing and the R and then the something called conjunction elimination but. We to convert what we just had to this expression the using the law of non-contradiction. So there's from here to here using disjunctive syllogism some elimination and then another.

One we the P applies R that's called material implication okay because we haven't discussed. All emphasize is that if you're taking a propositional have to learn you have to learn these various things and exactly which. One you should use at any of it's like an amazed you to turn left or you will progress. The word something simpler but start out with well it's very easy to get lost propositional. Logic when I was an undergraduate it was a philosophy course and it was a. This topic is pretty easy but still it was kind know quite a bit of time to get your head reasonably consistently and correctly.

So the as they given and we've managed to use some we're allowed to deduce that. This this whole is a proof from Wikipedia so well and good but my. All right so the reason I'm not going through this any of it really. I don't I want you to appreciate it's very powerful but unnerving claim. So we're going to evaluate this thing using the interested in P implies Q and Q plus R. All of do with this thing is we are going to evaluate it we're finding out what is equal to.

So this is just have to first of all convert everything in notation which ultimately only involves additions. In various places P implies Q we know you write the implication in. The algebra of bull implies R that's equal to one plus Q plus Q R and left-hand side over here. We have 1 plus P plus P temporarily for now because I want to simplify let's see what happens. So 1 times all this 1 plus and P Q times all of. It P Q plus another P Q plus without explicitly saying and you.

All know that still that implies 1 plus P plus P R so we've just cancellations here let me see. If I can point them a P Q so like it's the Q these PQ's cancel these over here. We have a Q R and these 2 PQ R's cancel Q R plus P Q those are. The things that did not evaluate that we're again using the fact that. We first term 1 plus the first term plus so when we expand. This out what do we get the 1 Q R okay and now.

When we expand this out what do this 1 plus P we multiply them together we're just I'm gonna multiply. This times this and now plus Q R times 1 plus P there and. Now I do we get there P R so if I multiply P R with PR they'll cancel that's good. If I multiply here another PR Q so they'll cancel and I'll have. One got from here to here we still have a bit more just copied what. I had on the last line of the this there's a 1 here.

The two peas will cancel this P and this P will cancel all right there'll. Now what do we get when we expand this out we get times 1 P times P that's 0 and we'll also have at. The back and now what happens this Q and this cancels with that Q R and. This QR p cancels with done we have evaluated the original expression result is that. This is the bull poly number for is a bull function this is just. The function always true so this is a tautology okay a boolean propositional.

Logic tautology so we have proved simplified okay this is yeah it's just it's just rules. It just subsumes the existing technology even clearer if we looked at some more complicated involving say five or six different variables lines or 64 lines or more it's a huge amount clever combinations of boolean expressions. Now absorption here and some identity here and some simplify I don't know we've done. It rob a block the Al Jarreau bool just get a grade 9 student. Some long expansions that have to be done but us there whenever we get to of anything it's. We just rub off that power our computers in a flash even with huge polynomials it's direction with.

The third aspect of propositional which are the rules of inference ok and how not those as well Im.