# 275 Inference Rules via the Algebra of Boole

Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're rules and I want to show you how. The algebra pool inference rules and to prove them and later on propositional. Logic originates with the work of Stoics and the aim was of course to systematize being able to structure arguments to decisively that. One sees in most propositional logic with a certain number of premises and these are. We are holding that they are true and then we're the basic structure. So sometimes its laid out etc then a bar then the conclusion underneath stringing these premises together and taking P.

When we think about it this way that we have an the algebra pool and. Then showing the validity proposition is a tautology namely that logic but in. The context of the algebra of rule because when we go from propositional. Logic to false with 1 and 0 making much more arithmetic to do. This argument inference rules are of the simpler ones today and I'll leave a few most well-known inference rule is modus ponens and. We assume that P implies Q or Q it's another example if P is.

It is raining and Q is I get wet it's raining then I get wet conclusion from those proposition combining. The two premises into one in conclusion is Q so we write it as P times P precedence of operations here is. When you see this like this so this operation is done first first. All of that implies Q ok so natural question is it valid so let's prove. It using the algebra of Q implies Q and what we want to do is. We want with simpler expressions just involving the algebra pool so the product is just a product Q.

In the algebra bool P implies Q is the same as step there and. Now we rewrite it further because so we write it as well first of. All we simplify P times P which is also P and P times P Q which P Q implies Q. Now another implication we rewrite P Q times Q and since P Q times Q is. The same cancel and we just get identically one bool is a computation which amounts to taking an number that it's equal to that. It reduces to and one so that's the algebra of bool equivalent to that's.

The way all of these things work 9 simplified algebra and we hope to get. One which that works in all cases now the second major two premises for that there's also a P implies Q these two is not P. So if P is it is raining and raining then I get wet while. This premise says not be raining that's the nature of modus toll two premises are combined with an and and. Then get not Q and P implies Q all of that implies it. We are just going to simplify it that means the corresponding expressions in.

The algebra pool 1 plus Q the and is the product P implies Q is simplify. This product let's see we multiplied multiply by Q q + P Q plus another P Q and that have 1 + P plus Q + P Q implies 1 + P ok. So now term plus the product of the two terms okay here 1 plus 1 that's gonna disappear there's a P times 1 plus P is 1 plus P squared which is. The 1 plus P there and we still have to multiply times P is P Q + another P Q and. Then there's these two p qs cancel here's a P Q and there's cancel. The two peas cancel and all that's left really just a simplification or a reduction that roll another very important inference rule is.

The about P implies Q and Q implies R from those two another. One called disjunctive syllogism P or Q two is true at least because it's a inclusive has to be that Q is true. Now remember however primarily thinking about trues and falses we've longer English statements that have possible truth algebra which. We can operate with with the laws the product of the premises P or Q times 1 plus P thing okay P or Q right that's an inclusive order it's P plus Q plus. The product P Q times 1 plus ok P times 1 plus P is 0 Q times 1 plus P well is also P Q and another P Q well there's. Some Q now this implication can then be replaced with term times the second and.

The Q squared here is a a P Q which cancels with that P Q and. We are left of algebra so if a grade 9 student has learnt algebra. Then this is I could think tractive kind that they have some power here. This fiddling way because everything is mod to reduced we get to remove anything that has a factor of 2 or any that that that algebra is enough to establish a it's a very attractive application that slightly more sophisticated inference rule called R is a second premise and. The conclusion is Q times not P or R implies Q or R ok. So let's see P is 1 plus P so this is 1 plus P plus R plus.

The is Q plus R plus Q R now this thing simplifies a have a 1 plus P. The R is cancel and we have a bus we expand this out let's see. We get a P times this P R times P will be there. The P R times Q the these three terms it applies Q plus R plus Q R ok 1 plus. The first term plus the product of the two try to do it here. So what cancels so this Q is I'll write it like this Q times Q that Q going to cancel with.

This Q P times that Q don't R ok what have we not taken account over here. We cancel with this Q P times Q R which will also be else have. We not done yet this R we multiplied that RQ this R with. This Q okay yes okay this R we going to appearing here with. This Q times that Q one there so I still have to have Q times Q R or done. This one here has to coming out there's that one yet so let's do that.

One there we go and both QPR's so they cancel okay it's a bit expand. It and cancel things out but the the point except for what No. So our grade 9 algebra suffice we're in possession of at least some useful. In some videos that go about what about poetry and from Lewis Carroll's collection and here are about. So we introduced some phrases some sort it is interesting M stands for. It is modern y it is affected and s it's about soap bubbles and I've translated those statements.

Now in terms of the first one was I implies P if it's interesting it's affected Y implies us. If it's your poem if it's affected then it's not popular and finally not about soap bubbles and. I asked you at that conclusions to these various premises now in fact conclusions that. We could draw ok there's lots a simple conclusion that's easily stated and. This little bit painful because it says Y implies not interesting the conclusion is that your poetry see how. We can establish this logically using our I want to introduce a clever little technique bit more smoothly sometimes.

So this is it's an identity of expressions saying that this is P and Q implies R and. This one is P implies Q can be simplified and reduced using the algebra is. The same these aren't the same rule of Pauli and Q implies R well P and Q is. The same as P 1 plus P Q plus the product P Q R. The second one 1 plus Q plus Q R and then this is going to be Q R and. Then when we expand this the P times 1 P Q plus P Q R which is.

The same as we got up we could say something weaker we can say ah. This of being a tautology so we could put an arrow would also be a tautology but. The Equality here just imply one implying the other these have something like. This we can replace it with let's get back to your poetry as analyzed by Lewis that we've already talked about involving. The deduce from this that why implies not I so what identity and augment. The premises with Y so all I then that's the same as saying that these first a useful technique.

When we're trying to deduce case Y applies not I we take the Y out and make. It speaking the more premises that we have the more we now have six premises. We label them 1 through so let's have a look at 3 &amp; 6 here. We have Y and we need to apply modus ponens if we know Y and. We ponens using 3 &amp; 6 okay now we use 5 &amp; 7. So 7 is over here so not M implies not S but we also know.

The same elastic so when we were talking about implies Q from that. We deduce not P so it's the not s we must deduce not not m naught naught M is five and seven. We can call that eight now let's a so we can deduce a that's modus ponens from two P that's again modus ponens using four and. The not P here we have I implies P if I implies modus tollens with 1 and 10 that's. The one that want so now we can deduce that these first five product that whole thing implies Y implies not Carroll statements are true which. We not only that your poetry is necessarily uninteresting and clearly but there's a few things to say okay.

One statements about the real world involving notions on into this mathematical framework which we're. The validity of that transference the validity of mathematical modeling is questionable so be entirely valid. The other point to make is that carefully constructed by Lewis Carroll who was path through. It right we found a relatively simple inference rules but what would happen. If would happen if we were not talking about some but rather a large system with. All important real-life situation an automatic city there might be all kinds of rules that.

We we might be interested in whether these rules example we can't expect that there is going to deductions. So we really are looking ultimately if we are looking for a more powerful general towards that and we're going to see. The algebra we're going to have to also introduce some some to talk about something that just came up briefly. So there are other identities that are worth of propositional logic there are also certain lay out. So that we can see them clearly and we do want to think about how to trans and and to empower us for bigger situations and bigger forward towards. So.