# 276 Logic Identities via the Algebra of Boole

Good day I'm Norman Wildberger we've been talking rules today we're going to talk about identities tools that. We can use to manipulate arguments quite a lot of them that we've already seen bool which is. This purely algebraic mod-2 these identities and in fact there's quite that are quite interesting. So a propositional connectives and or not implies and equivalence be established with. The algebra of bool so in just identity of bool poly numbers so represented. Some examples for example the item potent laws other one is P and P equals P okay I'm.

One of the the algebra of bool so we have P plus P plus. The over here P and P that's the product so P squared so these are our almost immediate and generally. The algebra bool is always very simple so identities that we've already seen. In the context that's traditionally used to structure logic gate same laws are appearing here although. The context propositions coming from real life and trying rather than creating electronic circuits that do algebraically. The the context is very similar engineering is very close to this propositional distributive laws we've seen them many times.

The and P and F equals F P or true equals true these. The double negation law that knot knot P is equal or not P is always true de Morgan's laws livery Q is not P and not Q while not P and Q is not P very easily with. The algebra bullet I'll leave it is you just convert the left-hand side and. The using the algebra bull addition and multiplication the boola Polly numbers and. The left-hand side correctly now I do want to spend a little bit more with. The absorption laws two of them first one is or Q is P.

So the strategy is let's take the first that's or P Q because P and Q is. The same as P Q the algebra bool but now we have to replace. This that would be a circle sum here it's represented plus the second. One plus the product P plus it cancels with that one and we just get P that P or Q. The end is represented by the product the this out we get P squared is P P Q and P times a very important identity which is less familiar plays a much more subdued role. In the logic gate all in standard treatments but the identity is we talked about.

This before but it's important to identity it allows us to replace this implication not ok let's prove. It let's take the right hand pool so we have to take 1 plus P plus Q plus. The represent an or 1 plus P there the Q here and additional P Q and. We recognize that 1 plus P plus implies Q so these are indeed equal ok. So there algebra of circuit analysis and this boolean that's one of the things that makes propositional electrical engineer because. They see that there's is that both of those theories are algebra bull let's just remind you about.

Logic side what we're representing algebraically and in electrical engineering terms that's the and of. The gate the or P or Q in the propositional some not an ordinary. Some the ordinary some is the represents the inclusive or of the propositional an or gate pictured like. This and not P well that's represented by not P this gate here with negation okay but. The implication which is the in the propositional logic story the P implies Q is 1 plus P plus PQ. This plays a lesser role in gate however that doesn't mean that it doesn't is a standard terminology called an imply is.

One of the notations that sometimes used in and we can see why that makes sense because. This suggesting that we're negating P so it's not P or we've established that not P or Q is exactly. The symbol for P implies Q but it is the case that is because. This is a gate it's not symmetrical here you have to worry about which inputs also there's. The question of how do you corresponding so there's a connection but it's a between. The propositional logic and the electronic is very useful in ordinary life and identity which asserts that these two implications not Q implies not P let's see why let's have a P.

So not Q is 1 plus Q not P is 1 plus B. So we're represent that in the algebra rule well it's 1 of them ok what do. We get these two ones cancel together the Q here will cancel with. This Q here so all together we get 1 plus P plus P Q which. We proof of the contrapositive identity and here's wet is equivalent to if. I don't get wet then it getting wet implies not raining so this is a very appears.

In mathematics many times sometimes if prove this contrapositive version for example situations. This is mathematically a one that we've already seen before but I want to. The exportation identity and this part here we've implies Q implies R so. This was a way for us to Q to the list of premises that. We may already have two are also equal to P implies R or Q implies to simplify. This one here we get P Q implies simplify this one the Q implies R is 1 plus Q.

The product and then that simplifies to the same now is this one here P implies R or Q implies R R is 1 plus P plus P R Q implies R is 1 plus Q have to take. The first one plus the second plus see what happen there's various cancellations. One here so there's a one the P here cancels with the P R cancels with that PR Q are castles with a P Q R. We get P Q R from here and here we also we get a and we're also getting. It from P Q R so of a single P Q R so. We get the same thing that a triple of expressions there that are and.

In the course itself proper there will be curious interesting identities so the first. One equal to P Q R implies s and you think about is something of exploration of. Some symmetric we have P and Q Q &amp; R R and P and we're taking an Q plus Q R plus R P and here. We were reversing we're taking the end of those three things and the Q plus Q R plus R P plus also. This additional symmetrical thing where we have P implies symmetrical in P Q and R. We expect the answer bool poly number which is symmetric and turns out might like to to check that ok.

So great we've can use and a bunch of identities that we can propositional. Logic and to structure arguments to key ingredients if you're taking a propositional at a university. So you will be expected to rules and then apply them judiciously to various conclusion. Now that's all well and good ok but my too far down in. This direction so it's nice to the identities because they are useful we've seen of mathematics for example that contra positive don't want to take. The approach that we're going we're going to be clever about applying somehow simplified to where.

We want to go what approach a technology which doesn't require minut thing with. Some systematic large-scale technology to be clever and having to memorize all kinds grade 9 student who is fluid with. This algebra to help them simplify big expressions be able or to verify very complicated arguments. So to do philosophy course we have to investigate some some connection with with modern algebra also. So video or two I'm.