# 279 The Holy Grail of Propositional Logic

[music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in this course on boolean logic and applications to address. The holy grail of propositional the stalks and then to live Nets and ultimately systematize logical reasoning how do. We make it that's what we're accomplishing here with this from the classical propositional. Logic involving courses around the world this is a different point essentially solves. The problem in the way that the are in fact going to be reviewing two different resolutions of. This fundamental problem the basic and the second one is to exploit the somewhat explain to you.

In this lecture so we're basically and I want to explain both approaches. In the the illustrious knight Sir Galahad and his quest and he comes to a fork. In the road there are three marble road and there's a stone road and. In front knight and he talks to these Knights and here is says. The falling this road leads to the ray'll marble road the night guarding. The marble road Grail the night guarding the stone road declares the marble and you'll be lost.

Now Sir Galahad are always liars so can you deduce which road to. In terms of three propositions labelled G M&amp;S G states that the marble road leads to. The Grail ground then in terms of those we can express the Knights remembering of course that Knights. It is that they're saying we have three said turns out to be interpreted as it's not and that. If the stone road leads you there then what the the knight proclaimed and since he's second night guarding. The marble road said that so that's a lies we have to put a knot there and roads will lead to.

The Grail so not G and not s get you there but the marble road will not that's of. It because he's a liar also these are of these three conclusions so. This is not the case know which of these three conclusions if any is be that several roads lead there or. It might we have to figure this out the first step to the algebra of bool okay we're not going to start examining or thinking about. The various not going to do anything clever at all because systematic or mechanical way of proceeding to which are considerably more complicated connectives translate directly into. The algebra the algebra that we get with vectors of zeros and two and where multiplication is component wise two algebra and vector is component wise and B that logical connective is translated into plus B plus a B A or B that's like an inclusive or.

So that's how we go from that one to that one one to whatever. We have a implies B is one plus have an equivalence like this a is equivalent hopefully these are familiar to you. So we have to take the three premises and convert them into is not G and s implies M not something is adding it's a product. So it's the product of G with s expand this out to get 1 plus G Plus G s plus g 1 plus here not G is 1 plus G naught s is 1 plus. We have 1 plus 1 plus G times 1 plus s we expand S Plus s G and finally Z which is not G and not M G times not M which is 1 plus M and that's 1 plus. Now written in the algebra bool so we can forget just have algebraic expressions that.

We are going approach which is just to use boule reduction we conjunction of those premises by just multiplying. The total premises of we are assuming X and so there is our expression for X expression for out and simplify using bull reduction and as you multiply two things together and simplify that term let's say and. Then we multiply these two to of anything is zero and all exponents are GM and. Then we have to perform another expansion a little bit of work okay that's. The heart sits but it's a purely mechanical arithmetic Allah good at especially. If it's been modified with a engine ok so this is something that is very.

So our premises have now been reduced to just were interested in are. The product of the expression XY is that implies G so that's s plus poly number. So it's one plus the first term s plus you get an SG and another SG. So they cancel so what does that tell us about this implication is what we're getting here is not. One okay it's not and so this is not a valid implication it's not M. So now we have s plus GS implies M we get one M s and there is no cancellation here.

So again equal to one so this is not a proper logical have s plus GS implies s let's evaluate that it's. The two things so S Plus G s times s now when we with that s and. The S times GS is GS which cancels Galahad had better choose the stone road that will second procedure which is using. The bull Mobius s mg and let's order them this way as M doing a binary ordering. This would if we do that then the corresponding ordering of multiply these by M m and G M and. Then we multiply s that's a natural ordering of all the terms that three things once you've chosen.

This ordering GM x y&amp;z and here are the bool poly numbers for them plus GM s. So there's one of these there's one of a vector corresponds to one. One one he in the spot the terms which do not get involved Y which was G that. One there we have a GS and the rest are zeros M which is. The fourth one right there and the transform what it does is it takes these bull poly what does that mean. It means that it allows us to table evaluations of these premises would be.

If we that is we multiply in this case because there's sub 3. Now we can be a little bit efficient about just x y&amp;z but also whatever conclusion were potentially at three conclusions. So it makes sense are G M and s their potential conclusions of Y and Zed that we've just computed and. Then here because that's the second term M that's the third multiply that by our bull Mobius transform eight by eight matrix that looks like. This and let is repeated here and here and there's a block of by. This 2 by 2 block by repeating as 2 by 2 here there and.

The 2 by 2 block is obtained by taking a 0 underneath it. So it's the same pattern that you do the matrix multiplication so when at. The same time instead of doing them one by one the various rows that are obtained here are. The here so this first row here is the bull Mobius means that. This is the the boolean function expression in X with its various propositional okay. Then you just read down the truth table of exactly these values so.

This bull Mobius transform elaborate truth table is just going directly from function and there's. The value for X there's the M and s if you look at. It for a second you'll just going through all the numbers in we order things. We ordered G to be in to be in the forest' column so what can. We do now ok so have a look now what we're in a very happy here very quickly because what we're interested actual boolean function values. The operations are product XYZ at this level here we're just going if.

We look at these columns so that entry 0 in the column the first place where. We do not where we do not get a 0 we get a 1 is with. This things we're going to get this vector here 0 0 spot ok. Now let's compare those with the values things what does that mean it means that whenever to also be equal to 1. So we have to look in these those columns so G does not have once. It has two zero but s s is good because it has a 1 here and is true.

In other words we have a column of ones have to be checked here. So the rest of the table where the premises are all 1 and. Then we go down corresponding are also equal to 1 since they are to 1 while X Y Zed implies G or M is not equal to Mobius transform essentially by getting at. The but without having to go through the laborious gory entirety so this blue Mobius transform also relies on having these big matrices or with more variables T sub 4 T sub 5 and. So on to these things which we can exploit to make this one to make these computations by hand without. Now so it's an important benefit to going down simple bull Mobius transform.

We just have the simplest dual Mobius transform this matrix 1 so when. We do that matrix multiplication we get a right the effect of this is 2 we're taking. This the second entry is the sum of the two original where we have a t2 acting on a vector with four you do. The multiplication you get a a plus B is there now if we look at. This for a second what thing as was happening here if we think vectors. So let's say U is the vector a B and V is as.

The as the vector a B so if we apply t1 to baby. The same thing we got here we get a a plus here so. This first half of it is just u times t1 U of T 1 plus V of T 1 ok. So it's like a calm a of those two things and another way of saying that t1 together with u plus V times t1. So what we're and this second vector V and we're adding them B plus D and. Then we're applying t1 exactly like a plus C stays where it is and.

We have to add the plus D that's the rule that UV acted on on by t1 separately that's a lot like what's. The same basic recursive aspect repeats itself rule is that more generally if u and v are bull composite UVs that's a vector of length 2 to. The this pair works is that you take the TN on you and you stick them together to form. This bigger our example with X so X was originally 1 1 0 0 0 creating a big matrix and doing. It if we this up into two vectors of length four so there's over here. We should take this first vector and the vector 1 1 0 0 with.

The vector 0 1 0 1 to get we've reduced the bula Mobius transform T 3 to 2. So now let's do that recursively so how this vector up into two vectors no vector 1 1. The first vector 1 1 and apply t1 to it and the on. It so the sum of 1 1 and 0 0 is 1 1. So we get the same thing over here we split this up into. One and then also t1 to the sum of these two so t1 well that's.

The start of very first formula two entries 1 0 here again same thing 1 0 here. We that's 1 1 1 and this one the same as these ones you do is you take. The vector of length 8 break do that recursively breaking that up into each. One keep going down computers are excellent it by hand once you have a little bit of practice having to necessarily invoke a big matrices of pencil paper calculations reason what. So what of leibniz dream oK we've taken bools original bit made it a little bit more mod and framed. It in Google's original orientation and we've used that logic gate story that usually employs boolean scenario where we've taken.

The standard tools of all of them dispensed with all of them and mechanical completely routine and arithmetic our. Next video I'm going to go back to the origins of summarize how. This algebra boule story going on there I'm.