# 280 Aristotle's syllogisms revisited with the Algebra of Boole

Good day I'm Norman Wildberger we've covered from logic gates circuit and analysis. All the complete the circle by going back to the very birth of. Logic in ancient Greece at the hands have another look at Aristotle's syllogisms from. We are now comfortable with in fact this is a thinking because that was really his primary first place. He was interested in making contact which at that time was more or less. Aristotle the mathematical analysis of logic being an essay wrote in 1847 you could find.

This work you have a look at it you will see that in. Greek a quote by Aristotle so that emphasizes application at his work now. I might at bull's work you might see that it's a little one of. The big differences is that he tends to use or 1 minus X but for us that's. The same as X plus 1 so it's really the same that's just a little what we're doing a little bit easier. So today Aristotelian syllogisms and have a fresh look at logic views from.

The eyes of the algebra bull logical forms which are ways of combining pairs by these little vowels a e. I and O so let me little course that a little a be. So referencing a short form for every B is an A okay that's not that's a modern interpretation of what a bull algebra that represent these properties. In this algebraic form that it's B times 1 plus stands for no B is an A. So a little EB means bool that's corresponding to the corresponding 0 and. Then there's I look a I B means sum B is an it's represented by a B does not equal 0 and a of.

This one and so that's given by B times 1 plus they have always. The same form there are the syllogism whose name is seller n't has. The implies a EC so if we interpreted this in English B is an A and. This one here we're assuming that be able to conclude a EC which is. This one here then no C is an A that's one of his syllogisms and about. The propositions relating to these abstract to one of the early examples where.

We had five our population and then we had various were being human being a god being athletic what do these vectors mean. So the vectors just have which properties so this vector for H 1 1 3 is a human a 4 is a human and a 5 is not a working with mathematically from. We dispense with the population and we dispense the English words for these. The defining vectors so this is a vector H this is vector G with these vectors. Now in the algebra pool there's two vectors like H times G and. The multiplication 0 0 1 times 1 is 1 and 1 times 0 and 0 times 1 also a mod 2 operation.

So H plus G's we're adding 0 because this is a mod 2 operation and these guys say to a is to simply add 1. So 1 plus a it's like 0 1 0 1 1 and that's. The framework in which the doing when we're applying the algebra book we're and making. All our calculations in this in this connectives so we still have this. One here the addition to that we have K or a so ok. All right a an inclusive or as opposed to this one which is n here's G.

He is it the 0 implies 0 well that's what is 0 implies 0 by definition 0 implies 0 is 1 1 plus 1 is 1. So the only time an implication implies 0 1 applies 0 equals 0 otherwise equals quillin's just telling us whether they're equal. In zero these are equal and one these are not of negating in. This fashion classically we use opposites of K and then we have these two special names. The zero vector is consisting of all ones and we're seeing this one here here is we're really adding. The one vector to a we have this alternate or different framework syllogisms where.

We have expressions like K here's K gods are keen or they're not King that is that. If you take the product G times K in sometimes it's more convenient to think about. It 1 if we add 1 so 1 plus K G equals 1. So 1 plus true while K G is always false we have to connect. The Aristotelian syllogism story with propositional logic so it turns out a little bool to Aristotle's syllogisms is not entirely was really recognized by. Aristotle in a way and it has to do with the fact that two of Aristotle's from.

The other two we're gonna say that following somewhat Aristotle's terminology okay b is an A and no B is an A these two forms have two. The ones involving I and O let's at them again from the algebra rule point of view and little B. This is one way of saying it B times could also rewrite this expand. It out and add one B plus a B equals one when we do that. We see that plus a is 1 plus the first term plus the product implies a equaling 1 that's. The statement it's always it's always 1 now we might write the statement that capital B implies capital A.

So little a and converting it into something which logic world this this premise is really what about. This one a little EB so that means no B by a B equals 1 and. We can similarly get one plus a B equals one now it's in. The form to be true okay the one here is constant one is. The same as the premise that not a B right this logic world. The same as taking the not so we can be in the propositional.

Logic framework two are more problematic in this direction now focus on on these two and. The syllogisms that the syllogisms are not really much studied outside historical interest but. They don't really apply and such but still it's really interesting to a look at. Some of the syllogisms and I remind you certain figures okay first figure syllogism second on and those are categorized by. The the nature or the premises there's always two premises they here and here here and here and here near over okay and there's also third figure ones and here categorized. In terms of first figure and and Ferriero and here they are here and.

Then in estrus Faustino and berroco and here they are ones which just involve these perfect. They are these two right here Barbara and seller eyes and ohms similarly down here. In the second are perfect we'll call them perfect they only more complicated eyes and O's okay and. It turns that are perfect so in Aristotle's list there involve only these logical forms that are directly earlier. In this course I gave you proofs proofs involved well they weren't that complicated have to look at things. In the right way and substitutions or whatever I want to now have a point of view of.

The algebra bool especially with divorce the discussion from any cleverness it rather with an algorithmic systematic procedure. Then pretty well cut and dried I'm going at Barbara here's Barbara a little a BB little AC. Then every season a okay now what we are going forums the A's and. The e-forms and convert them showed you so a little a B is converted to B implies B and. This one is converted into C implies two as the premises and this is. The conclusion of these two and forming this composite expression what we're going to do is we're going to simplify that it's a tautology and.

If it's a tautology has to be one that's the crucial thing about. The the right-hand side has got to be 1 if the final we're taking these premises. So we're assuming assuming it's equal to 1 we're assuming this is deducing. Therefore that this is also equal to 1 composite thing and just evaluating. It ok so the clever we're just doing something automatic and do it for us ok. So we convert everything to B C implies B is 1 plus C plus BC C implies a.

We get 1 plus B plus C plus a B plus BC so. Now it how this implication expands it's 1 plus the and the second term and. Then you multiply that out term here cancels exactly with this times one. So get one let's circle that okay one that's what we equal to. One and that proves barbra now Barbara same as what we formally called HIPAA thetic old implies a okay no. Aristotle was there first of this syllogism it doesn't require any just expanding and simplifying okay.

The next one n't a little a b b in the leg c implies a little algebraically by. One plus a be assuming this is one here's on the implication c implies b and our. One plus AC okay we convert everything to algebra c plus bc we expand. This thing out here we get 1 becomes 1 plus the first term plus. The product we just did and we get one that proves seller it similarly. We replace these things this is one we do exactly the same thing as before.

We replace out we replace it like this we simplify we get of our four perfect syllogism is chemist race B there's algebraic forms for those various things simplify. It we get this we write it out and it's product and then. We simplify this thing here and this is good it's good in the sense that. We now syllogisms but only four of them in Aristotle's syllogisms there's 14 of them. All right so there's a very natural question what those symbols I and O and crucially. In the English some B is not an A some instead of all think that's something that modern.

Logic hasn't understood the challenge here and he tried to but it wasn't as convincing as. It could have I've just been showing you now so it naturally the algebra pool a little bit do. We need to have other syllogisms now if you're an electrical other syllogisms because. They don't come up in that I don't know if you're an engineer you where. In fact this thing doesn't appear it's certainly not of paramount modern importance point of view and a sense of completeness. The subject to begin with and really look more doing with these other syllogisms.

So this is a in our next video.