# 267 Sums of products, or products of sums？ Neither!

Good day I'm Norman Wildberger and in today's boolean functions to boolean expressions and that's taught. In boolean algebra oriented of approaches one involving a sum of products we're gonna see that with. The algebra of bool that neither of these becomes really the primary and. The distinction disappears and bit of Pleasant algebra also that's kind specific examples. So you'll see this dichotomy C and here is a boolean function f depending on is as a sum of products and that looks like. This correspond to ones so basically we're saying when this condition is satisfied or.

This condition is condition is satisfied this condition is because there's zeros here. The next one here the 0 the 0 and the 1 and so on ok. So that's one way is to concentrate on the zeros to say okay not satisfied and. This is not satisfied and this have four conditions corresponding to the zeros represented by a product and each of these things zero here will not happen. When a is one or when B some C corresponds to when this condition is corresponds to. This not being satisfied this corresponds to this not being satisfied so we of products essentially correlating to.

The ones sums essentially corresponding to the zeros in neither of these is considered a final or adequate fact unifying both of them to get a number associated to. The boolean function let's transformation rule here that allows us to replace that or. In the description of a sum the sum of products transformation rule and rows of a boolean function. The circle sum and words here is the function f that we've just have and I'm claiming that it's equal to. The are replaced with just ordinary sums for us the is that true why can these things be replaced. So and ordinary sums are different but just for this of a boolean function table.

We can perform this to more smoothly go from a boolean expression happening. So here's the main reason let's take bar b Bar C bar circle. Some a bar b Bar C if we using what we know about circle sum. We know we second term and then we have to add the product. The product has the property that at least one and without a bar. In this case C C is appearing happening for at least one of.

The variables why of this boolean function and these distinct rows the rows. They are different at least in one place different so there'll be a C and C bar and it's. This thing zero because C bar times C convert it is C plus C squared but C squared is equal to C. So that's the reason once you have a C times C that's why. This circle sum of these two terms is that explains why this is equal to. This similarly this one can be replaced for this one some with an ordinary sum.

We face this circle some with just an ordinary some well if we take. The to take this thing ordinary plus this thing plus well the product is by. The distributive law a product of this times this plus the product of. This plus the product of this sentence but each same phenomena that we've just talked about okay least. One input where they differ in this case two is zero and that happens for. All of these so we do indeed get to replace the circle sums to convert to a bool Pali number because.

We just number expressions so a bar is 1 plus a in the plus BC here 1 plus a times BC and here a B 1 plus expand and collect terms and use. The bool case often you can do things a little bit for example. This term here in this term here in addition there's a 1 plus C and a C. So if we 1 plus C plus C but that's the same as 1 because. The sum of these two can be immediately rewritten expand this out we get a b c plus a b c and here just end up with. This and when we expand that out a B and we're still left with a BC altogether number that represents our boolean function we've would find an electrical engineering course to better people way better.

Now the second courses is this product of sums something like these kinds of things are more difficult to convert. This to the algebra pool suppose X circle some Y circle sums that and just start a useful exercise. So here we could think about the expression for X circle some Y X plus y plus. We still have a circle some Z so we have to do and here's. The product ok when you expand this XY here you have an ex Zaid here you have a wise no cancellation. We get all of these terms so if well we would have to take.

All of these and sort another one like this another one I guess another similar expressions. We have to multiply that is laborious fortunately we don't have to go circumvent. This entirely so let me explain this of the boolean algebra so we'll just avoid. The and describing the boolean function to the bool not just the function f but also its negation values here and interchanging zeros and ones and once we've done. This little trick we see f is now replaced with the problem of writing an. The places where F had zeros so here are the expression using the boolean algebra approach but thinking about 1 plus F and describing 1 plus just do that.

So here's 1 copied and now 1% we're going back to our first situation sum of products or here or here 1 here is 1 plus a. This has a times 1 plus B times 1 plus C next one a times okay. Now we simplify this what have I done here plus a times one plus C and multiply everything C just multiplying that out and these two terms add these two terms. The 1 plus C and the C will is equal say B and finally. The last term ABC and the a B's cancel the a B C's cancel plus BC it's but here what we've done instead of concentrating concentrated on. The rows where F is equal to 0 equal to 1 it's really.

The same technology but either F or 1 plus F depending on whether cataloging. It in terms of the ones or in terms has lots of ones and very few zeros you'd rather. So you have to end up having fewer terms on the few ones. Then you want to concentrate on the ones algebra point of view we've really converted a importantly what we've really done is we've view and just found a unified way of going from looking at F or 1 plus F depending which. One is algebra simplified because X plus X is always zero solidify what we've learned today let's go through and a different boolean function called G value zeros but we'll use both methods you can see that looking at. The ones ok where is G equal to 1 ok the term 1 plus a 1 plus B C.

Next row 1 1 plus a and last one ABC so this is. When this thing is or this is 1 or this is 1 or. This is 1 ok let's have a common factor of 1 plus a times C. So they these two terms have a common factor a times 1 plus. The last term expanding out we get a a here plus ABC so there's. The final result a plus C plus associated to this boolean function G.

It is the same thing by looking at the negation of G so 1 we'll have ones where. This one has 0 so we're now simpler because there's only three of them. Now one here so that's corresponds to 1 plus a 1 plus C and. This last one down here a B 1 plus C when plus a 1 plus C is common between these two. So the this is just what it is now we expand 1 plus 1 is B. We get an ABC altogether we get a plus C plus in the other case.

This is the boule Pauly number answer there's no discussion in particular we get algebra world which is called. The sat problems of conundrum problem we're going to talk how do you tell whether. This boolean expression complicated is that as a as an algorithm or going to see that that's at problem it's not that be able to circumvent. It ok becomes much less the bool algebra story thus at problems are sort. It next time.