# 268 Trying to sidestep the SAT problem

[music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in today's a satisfiability problem and how. We try to algebra of bool approach to digital logic circuits expression involving circle. Some stands for or stands for not or inversion in variables say a 1 a yes or no that's. The set problem so what does is then some assignment of values 0 or 1 to. The output of the entire boolean expression of 1 so equal to 1 by choosing. The appropriate values that the expression is satisfiable and otherwise corresponding boolean function.

So if we imagine and here all the possible 2 to the N inputs to. The can imagine the values of this boolean expression have the value of. The boolean function and the this boolean function zero or not ok if it's zero never satisfiable. So it's not satisfiable and if another way of thinking about what we're talking expression ultimately evaluates to a function. The zero function this sad problem is a difficult it was the very first problem to be proven to be at. The University of Toronto now what does this theoretical computer science not so much.

In pure aspect so speaking an np-complete problem correct in polynomial time polynomial time. In time it requires to check whether a solution is it's an NP problem and it's np-complete. If this that any other NP problem can be reduced to the interesting because. If you can figure out a way of lot of other problems also. So the the challenge solution exists in polynomial time to question that's a major theoretical. The Sat problem is famous because it was really in other words if you figure out a very efficient you become really famous not just for that but for can be converted into a solution of a gone into analyzing.

The SAP problem restricts and these are called conjunctive normal form and in. The boolean algebra world this is a of things called clauses and each Clause is words ORS of either input variables or their are called literals. So literal is either an input clause is a sum in a sense of circle sum or or. In this form then there's a elaborate technology that are designed to take an expression like expression is satisfiable or not. So there's a circuit how do you express it as a product form well that's also an interesting question. In called the Satan transformation that gives you and converting the corresponding expression into.

If we take that as our starting point we can ask that there's. Some choice of values of a B and is equal to one so there's a lot of algorithms LD PLL style mark stochastic search there's quite try to address. This this problem especially when clauses where it's impossible to do this by hand to note is that. If we're interested in when this be one precisely when each clause is equal to. One one involves in this case four separate steps we won and this thing won simultaneously. Now this is in the algebra of bull so I don't want to present want to give you a sense of how.

They work search in a tree like fashion a search for expression so let's stick with. The expression some C a bar circle some B bar circle some C a. Some B bar circle some C bar notice that each one are two bars on a and B here there are two bars C. So we see that this is a symmetrical expression point so typically one of these programs might tree of possibility let's say starting with. The variable can have could be zero or one let's say if we. Now make a further assumption let's say we that these are all ones gives us.

Some information take these two pieces of information first of bar here that's a 1. So if we have 1 or anything condition will guarantee that this term is 1 okay similarly. This clause will also be 1 so this first but it doesn't say anything directly about these 0. Then 0 plus anything is just the other thing this would just be B bar circle. Some C bar so if equals 0 then what happens to this clause a is 0 B forced to have C equals 1. So if we want this to be these three choices this is 1.

This is 1 and this so here a is 0 B is 0 ah but that means that's 1 0 circle sum or 1 or 0 that's going to be 1 as just with. This single branch of the tree we don't one allocation of the variables which yields a B equals 0 C equals 1 and. So therefore we can say for a bigger problem it's not so easy. So typically trees and sometimes you get to the situation where then you have to go to another branch or impose down a tree and. Then you come to some condition means you have to go back up. The tree and and move to a different set of assumptions okay it by hand but with thousands of variables let's problem and you do need programs and algorithms to course is that a lot of problems even.

If initially more manageable if we aree express them with the so we can think about simplifying conjunctive expression with. The algebra of bull and typically quite different from the conjunctive normal here suppose that. We have a logic circuit with C and so on let's agree to use little a little bool expressions rather general expressions. In the right so the capital letters are the inputs then some some expression ultimately an algebra bool being little a. In this other portion and there's a C's are more general things they don't have to created from input variables and we're going to move from a boolean expression point of view to simplifying little formulas or identities that to show you a lot more examples of. This circle some B times a circle some B bar algebra it has a circle.

Some representing at or inversion and we're saying that if we convert this simplifies dramatically and just becomes a a or b to prove these things. Now by converting everything expression and we replace a circle zombie with B bar with a plus B bar plus a B bar. Now we can what they are in the algebra pool which are 1 plus a B and. Now this expression becomes a plus 1 plus out we get 1 plus B plus a B because. The a here expression that we need to expand and simplify distributive law a times 1 there's an a a times squared is a. Now I multiply all of these 3 by B everything by a B well.

We get a B and then this and now there's lots of cancellation because. The there are four a B so they also cancel in pairs a. So purely in the algebra of bull framework we've us to go from a boolean algebra expression to. Now recall that if we have a circle sum of three algebra bool. We get this rather longer expression plus ABC so we'll keep that in mind and. Now let's circle some B circle some C times a circle some the proof is immediate.

If you recognize that this we're doing is we're thinking about the a plus B is. The same object so we have the object plus bar and the previous lemma tells us that's just. The role of a in the previous so this gives us an each with three literals here is another little is. One plus BC times one plus a and I've just bit easier to remember. If we want a blue I'm preferring just to write it like that here over. The B and C are reflected by the having negation one postpay okay I'm gonna leave.

This as techniques that we've just been talking about and combining this one and. This one so a circle some some C bar so you have to multiply. This one by and you should get a plus B plus C plus a times B to reflect. The fact that the B and C are playing on this term and similarly another lemma that sort. Some B bar circles some C so the bars over the a and C. Now okay and so you can work out what you will get one plus a times B plus C.

The B and leave these three as exercises for you to do the algebra very simple but but powerful algebra started with which is. This expression this is an C times a or B bar or C bar times a bar or B bar is that. This thing reduces to in the algebra bool symmetrical expression because while the input is no. One and there's no quadratic or cubic symmetric we can just use the two previous lemons that. We this thing and we also have an expression for this this product as a plus. One plus a times B plus plus B plus C plus a times B plus C.

Now I'm just and the last one that we had was an expression for to take. The product of these two things okay what by these when a times. One is a a times this will get a times B plus C and. Now when we multiply this and then when we multiply it by this we'll get. It is the same as B plus C and now things simplify always zero. Then remind you that's because if squared is the same as a so we're getting to a have a times B plus C and that little expression C over there.

So those two will cancel and what's plus C combining with the a to give us a with here. So what we've done now is we've evaluated the this is a blue poly number at least. It would be if B's capital C etc okay and this bool poly number telling whether an expression is zero or not is. If it's not zero then it's not zero okay once once number okay. This is a non zero bull poly number so satisfiable okay but it's telling us more telling us exactly what. It is exactly much further than the sat problem asks us to the going further we're demonstrating exactly what not hard to do and even.

In a medium-sized problem clauses and so on something like that all right efficiently but. If it's very very big and you of variables and so on then proceeding down. This of this bullet number might be way too ambitious SAP problem itself is. This thing zero or not okay how to take a standard SAP problem expressed. In convert it to an algebra bool expression thereby want to do is to adopt an algebra of bool point sidestep. The Sat problem by not even approaching a gate circuit we want to express that not.

In terms disjunctive normal form which is a sum of products the two kinds of approaches that you standardly would rather do is rate at. The beginning is to want to go to these intermediate positions they view but for us. They are not convenient to express it directly as a bool poly number are. The two crucial properties that we use in the fact that 2 of anything is 0 and. The fact is always immediately reducible to X so again we of bool poly numbers. So this is quite interesting suite of quite elaborate technology that has things with another suite of tools which is you can see.

I hope the the kinds of challenges an immediate transference to go from. One of these they're very different mathematically even though and an exclusive or okay but that manifests our. Next video I want to talk about how to address point of view. So I'm forgetting about the boolean about what kinds of programming tools we need to kinds of problems. In the algebra of bool context potential for programmers to make important this side of things.