# 269 Boole Reduction： A challenge for programmers

Good day everyone I'm Norman Wildberger today for programmers to implement the algebra bool. The direction of logic gate circuit analysis which we will be moving towards also okay and motivated by that. The idea of having a very has thousands or tens of thousands or even. We want to simplify this thing or in the sad case zero output function or not. So this motivates develop some software tools some programming systems so Bible reduction. The process of which is ultimately a polynomial or a poly number words with.

The addition and multiplication purely a bool poly number and I remind you that's a. The power of any variable appearing is at most is a software environment that allows us to make really allowing us to do arithmetic but not with very flexible and important development. In modern with even very large polynomials and these days allow us to do. This including axiom maple mu Pad scientific workplace to write my papers like inlay a another environment that draws upon. The languages so these are the kinds of environments interested in some one of these or expert. In these various environments that allow us okay that's the aim so I want to explain today general challenge is especially important for it's also going to be useful for us.

When we want we will be doing in some videos to come and it's intelligence. So underlying a lot of AI are sort making and I think the algebra bool which is to promote here is a really viable alternative. So what we want to do is we want to empower be able to work smoothly. In this environment in of reducing large expressions to our canonical we're doing is we're wanting to distance or move view on these things which is. Now the current alternate framework which I I'm trying to convince use and to learn. So with this example I want to here is a relatively simple circuit with inputs a and.

The outputs are into this three input or gate analyze this so because there are three inputs notation let's say that H of a B and C is a circle and. I remind you that in the algebra of bool if we plus C plus a B plus AC plus BC plus a B C alright an or. So what we have is this function H apply to inverting a and B. So there's a one plus a and a B the second and gate is an A and an inversion of B inversion of B as well as a C. So 1 plus B C okay input these things here then we're gonna get. Some representation of this circuit and our problem is just do it directly.

So if we just think about substitute these values in here for a little a b a here's. The little b here's a little c and then which is right there and. Then AC is the product product B C product of those two which is right appearing twice and finally. The ABC is the product one here and this one here that's just polynomial. Now we want to simplify this we want to it's it's more than just simplifying. It using these computer algebra systems have so they all a polynomial expression.

In fact they'll all get would get if you just ordinarily evaluate this. The linear ones ABC up to degree six one a squared there's some threes and twos and and forests go beyond. This we want to give some more power to further reduce this into a boule poly reasons first of. All we have not evaluated it in set to zero here so if. We did that that form would two here to here that it would be killing those that. We have to do and the other reduction squared is just the same as a b cubed is.

The same do that the simplest thing would probably all the or to simplify. All the coefficients mod have a B here this to BC would disappear. This for this one and then what we would do is we would off. All the exponents now that's a step that most of them do not have any built-in routines that. I have to go and manually rub off all these digits is just. Some little routine that amongst other here to just one in other words basically rub them need a further application of.

The mod to reduction the exponents we'll get an a/b but will also cancel. If we do a further mod two simplification can get this expression this is. The end result the result is a plus B plus C plus AC plus BC C is playing a bit of a different role than. The and good so that's that's one approach this is to to first obtain a polynomial and. Then these bool to reduce it to a bool poly number which is like by hand. We could see that we could do the same this is going to be important because.

If we want relatively efficient ways of doing this because so efficiency is important. So have a look at this we can evaluate or reduce with the boule reduction. It what do by that well there's a couple here now that is. The same as 1 plus B so we could right so that's a simplification that. We can make all out and collect terms that's obviously gonna efficient but something else. We can notice is that a is always 0 because the same as a plus a squared.

If we recognize that we could just eliminate that preliminary boule reduction to a certain extent polynomial that. We get at this stage will be will go more efficiently all right. So that's to to do we're trying to think about programming to smoothly do these kinds of bul reductions expressions. So let's summarize what we've said applying these two reduction formulas is X and. In fact higher powers of X are also take a big algebra of boule expression which is input variables that. We have together with to operations and we do that using just regular just.

The inbuilt polynomial manipulation software everything mod to cutting down on the efficients. Then we eliminate powers bigger than one basically down so that they're just. One and then finally down will have resulted in some more duplications we are. In possession of a bool poly number and of procedure that we could try to program okay sophisticated approach where. We perform the bool the end but at various levels as we're kind big algebra pool expression. So we perform bull expand those little sub units and then repeat up try to illustrate.

It by this example so here's a a direct polynomial it's built out of sums and a product of. Some sums but the sums themselves so this is a product of sums of products of sums. So what would we do in this situation we would be just to feed. This into our CAS system and this thing out what we'd rather do is to look at of sub terms. So for example here there's a product this product here we could look and say. This this this bigger product is itself a product of three all we could remove.

The three okay we can expand could do reducing the powers we could do a further simple form. So then when we can add this to this for that first product and similarly over here thing find a reduced expression of. This thing this constituent here is going to be a lot simpler to have to multiply these two simplified things of operations that I've just described my two mod two reduction. Now in addition we would want to that are going to be useful to identify appearing. So that's appearing over here right you can recognize that then BOOM that entire term is out. All right let's save us a lot of expansion thing that we can do is to look for powers individual variables but powers of expressions of ABC to.

Some K okay bigger than one we can rub so for example here there's a. One plus B plus C that one plus C we squared we can rub off. The it at various stages depending on the nesting of we alternate application of our two basic rules. So we go back and forth between these bit more sophisticated I'm not saying. This is you think about this is a very interesting problem big expression with hundreds and thousands of. I think it's a very interesting challenge is going to empower us to apply.

The algebra and I'd like to also make the suggestion that bull reduction functionalities. In the actual computer algebra system but just some programming these many others any programming language that able to deal with polynomials and mod modulo about having a little subroutine that goes further a polynomial expression that might be computer algebra systems and. It might be good stand-alone routines that we can add to to these too big. We can efficiently do bool reduction on a full bull reduction to find. The ultimate bool us in that case or for other reasons we in. This algebra of bool context so for that we Sat solvers in this algebra of bull context.

So sat solvers that have been established a lot of they're going to be looking different here ok. So look at a special case we only have three inputs ABC is a polynomial expression which consists of here that can either be 0 or 1 a multiple of a a a multiple of AC a multiple of BC and a multiple. So in effect what ends up happening is that you one that's what. The bool poly number looks in the question of whether this poly number is but just whether it's 0 or not that is. The sad it's satisfiable so how could we check ok so what we need to do is just to find. One of can automatically deduce that this poly number is figure out that there is an AC term somewhere.

In this thing is satisfiable because that forces tamiya specially for big things. Then to find the special programs that just address this question we had before. So here's the same thing that we had is zero or not without necessarily expanding. The I'll just show you how you can decide that in of things that you might be doing. So what we're a nonzero coefficient so if we stare at it and are. We gonna get a from this expression so it's here so in here where can.

We get an A well doesn't we can multiply it by one that would be an A but out here there will not be any term that's just there's not going to be any single a appearing single a appearing how about. In the second bracket be zero so there's no a contribution coming from and. This a is going to have a coefficient well will come from the 1 squared times 1. So there will first term is a plus something this second term is are there any ones floating around no there are around either. So it's a plus something with no and then when we multiply those two things. The a not be any a times ones in either either here not going to appear and.

So that's the only way of a there's no a Squared's or a cubes appearing coefficient of a. When we expanded out will be one expansion and bull reduction to deduce that. This programs that in the various languages or computer big expression like this expression. In the algebra determines whether it's zero or not along some all right. So that's also an i think an important and to create some some nice working tools for at a very important correspondence between boolean a whole new connection between. This subject and you'll join me for that Im Norman Wildberger.