# 255 The Algebra of Boole is not Boolean Algebra! (I)

[music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger the mathematical accomplishments of George with algebra we're going to explain. The algebra somewhat different from boolean algebra so that's get to in the. Next video so George Boole analysis of logic in 1847 and I want to present. So I'm going to basically take Bulls ideas and I think is more congenial to understanding. So the circuit analysis so the prior logic going back to developments with transistors and circuits and two. In a very interesting way and then also sort really connects with set theory.

In an interesting want to stress the point that the algebra bool going to be talking today about. The algebra of if you read this paper and it's a good way I'm setting things up is parallel to. So I'm going to be using a different framework this out let us proceed by looking at an example or beings and. This population includes humans and/or keen okay and it turns out that we and. This little table tells you which of them are are noble and keen. So example here are these five one is not a human how about gods well.

This one to be a human and a god okay it's possible of them are athletes these two are athletes okay that are a different character. This one is keen now you may say well normal what you mean by God what do you mean by. It athlete Noble we're looking at this situation from up with this classification and we're of these qualities or attributes what we're mostly properties. So we can finesse the any the nature of these things and concentrate syllogisms over here for example. We can convince are the athletes and sure enough those athletes true statement how about. Some gods are keen where gods and the keen that one's keen so it's not true statement how about no noble ones our athletes are athletes that's true.

So there's another true of these propositions of syllogistic type the exact definition of these terms we'll just and that's a key starting point to interpretations and just concentrating on what. So in logic these propositions are often framed we can dispense with this distinction being on an equal footing. So we're gonna front of humans gods and athletes and treat being on. The same footing so we're gonna rewrite the our population consisting of these objects or just to give them. Some names and then we're gonna of being human and instead of writing true or use 0 and 1 to denote whether. The property is on the first row here we see a 1 1 1 1 that's telling that they're human and.

The last one does not have is shared by these two athlete properties shared two and. The Keane property only that one has that as previously except now we're working with just heading towards a binary understanding of what's. In the middle of the 19th century when bull was anywhere near to. The extent that it has today so feels at this point but nevertheless it's good variant of a field. In fact this is usually called consisting of 0 and 1 but I would rather not call. I think that when we're looking at finite fields in many many situations.

We want to separate our not equal to 2 and characteristic equals 2. Now worry about that basically what I want to do is I call. It something else and we're going to call be a buy field and. The definition is analogous to different and a little bit simpler ok so here there's a lot of information here but let's 0 1 it's ordered there's a comma there and. Then 1 ok now we have two operations we have this 0 plus 0 is 0 0 plus 1 is 1 1 plus 0 is 1 and and here is multiplication also multiplication mod 1 times 1 is 1 ok. So those are the two operations operations satisfy first of all the commutative add two elements or multiply two elements.

Then elements it doesn't matter whether you combine with the last two usual associative properties are true. In this situation and then we have we're combining multiplication with addition so x x times y and. We follow the usual convention that okay and here's the distributive law in. The other point out the fact that the 0 and 1 are playing because. In this field there is only 0 and 1 but might be other elements besides. The 0 1 and 1 you add 0 to any element X you get X.

When you you multiply it by 0 you get 0 ok then in field have to talk about there's an additive inverse and that. We say an additive inverse in the following y equals y plus x equals 0. Now in this particular simpler law which is this one that x plus x equals. The additive inverse property because the x is to know what you have to add to. It to get zero you so x is its own additive inverse for any X and. The is that for an X which is not zero we should find that.

When you multiply x times y in either order that's true here as well and. The multiplicative element so it's all rather trivial but I stated interested in more general by fields. Now I want to as a field in my view for for two reasons first not two. So as far as I'm concerned a field to be and it should have a minus wanna and those three don't want them to coalesce. I certainly don't want them two of them to coalesce either so when. I say elements in the field another reason this is not subtraction around and there's no division.

We are there's only addition there's multiplication make sense to say what is 1 minus 1 or 1/1 just gonna call. This a bye field it's a very simple arithmetic it's the basis of binary arithmetic is a very important object and its really a bool. In modern mathematics were used to fields being other things are built and we're gonna be talking. This series so generally the idea is you have built up from fields typically vector spaces is vector spaces or linear spaces. Then sometimes you on that to make those vector spaces into algebra thing here but. In this very simple-minded with just two elements okay and the the real dimensional thing that's built up from.

The by case of B 2 to the 5th so this is a 5 dimensional coincides with. The example that I've already 1 2 3 4 and so on ok. So let's look at B 2 to the of elements from the BI field. So B 1 B 2 B 3 B because those are the only two elements. In our by there's 2 times 2 times 2 times 2 times 2 that's make. It into an algebra we need to have a number operations that make a like a vector space need an addition of vectors.

So there's one vector B 5 the C 1 through C 5 to add them. We just add 3 plus C 3 B 4 plus C 4 and B 5 + C 5 to multiply modest it's just going to be 0 or 1. The way we do the entries by that number lambda so with those vector space like a three-dimensional vector space. The by field now to make it into an algebra we're this is a little bit more sophisticated and we're. The multiplication is going to be point wise so are also in B 2 because. We can take products in two just point wise product B 1 C 1 B 2 C 2 B 3 that.

We consider humans and gods here's a gave you earlier about which ones were humans. So first four objects were humans and the last one position of the gods okay. Now how do we add these by field so 1 plus 0 is 1 1 plus 0 is 1 1 plus a 0 here and. Then 1 plus 0 is 1 and 0 plus 1 is corresponds to. The logical operation or or okay it's like the disjunction where you're the stoical meaning that. If you have this one then the result is 0 and the sum while.

The summit algebra level so H times G this point wise product 0 1 times 0 is 0 1 times 1 is 1 and. Then the 1 the product H times G and this corresponds to the and G. This represents those objects that have the only ones which are humans and gods are that third represented. The things which are either human or say exclusive or EXOR ok so humans X or gods those we're going back to. This earlier time point that for the purposes of Bulls algebra than the usual or okay and that does align with ancient. Greeks thought about it too so there's may be very unfamiliar to us.

So we talked about by field with just two elements now we have to case B 2 to. The fifth ok this algebra 5 tuples properties that are important to us. So suppose we and ones what properties do we have well most the properties of. The by field themselves because happening at a point so it's reasonably easy to community of both addition and multiplication for addition and for multiplication of five tuples have a a numerical distributive law should have said that what numbers mean. In write that down because it's important five field zero and one those are. The scalars level so if lambda mu are zeros are ones then lambda times P plus Q is lambda P plus lambda mu P and.

Then we have two special v tuples okay here because this is an algebra there are two of say is. The zero element and the five couple of be confused with the binary numbers zero and. One hopefully it will be a clear in the context and or multiply with these. We can expect some any P we get P if we multiply zero times any Q Q there's. One more that's off this list I might add one to one of these things that's gonna. One of the fundamental properties that else on here oh yes so these two properties here.

The first one is the N tuple version of the X have any five tuple you add. It to itself you're additive inverse of any five tuple is itself and that. If you have the product of two five couples of zeros at least. One of them is nonzero then if either one of these is zero well. Then this rule if the product is not zero it means that neither useful properties of. The by field algebra B 2 to bools algebra lives Bulls algebra is.

All about the now I want to explain why this algebraic setup algebraically okay and. This is already a Q so we're thinking now of having a population of those beings like being human or being a God denoted by P's and Q's and for us those are going. This five topple H represents the property of property of being athletic that's what sub 2 to. The fifth in this case because we have you now is that we can restate. This fundamental with this expression that P Q equals P this is an algebra that's our bool algebra okay and. This that's understood that this was the equation understanding that goes back to live Nets.

So our humans and here's our athletes and we were okay it's not true that. Every human is an athlete how can we see that well we can see that because. In the third one that's what these ones are if we look over here to. The first and third ones are the first and third also humans and you see are humans. So every athlete is a human now what entries well we have to ensure that whenever AI is. Then we don't care what H I is can be anything all captured by.

The product a H ok so we take the the product and it's only point wise product. So we get a 0 1 times 1 we get a 1 0 times 0 1 is 0 can. We possibly have gotten a because here is a a back that means that whenever a was a 1. We had that whenever something is an athlete it's also a itself is just a algebraic Restatement of fact syllogism involving words involving. Every this purely algebraic relation P times Q equals P and this case is B 2 to. The fifth okay let's look at a Q so we claim that that's equivalent to.

The so let's illustrate that with say n representing ones are the second and. The fifth they're noble represents the property of being noble okay we've noble. So what's the connection so we claim that that mean well it means that whenever a. I equals better have n I being zero so whenever something has to be zero and. The third one has to be zero in is noble now that means that. When you multiply is n and when we multiply them well we multiply.

We possibly get zero well it means that whenever zero simply we're multiplying by 1. We get a 1 so corresponding in order to get a product of zero have. The property that that these two things are same time so no athlete is Noble which is a times. This one so this was P Q equals P means every P third of Aristotle's forms is sum P is a Q sum. The product P times Q being not equal to 0 not human vector and n is our noble vector. Then some human to be noble it means that we look at them is noble.

So is the first one noble no is the in fact the third. One is not and the fourth one human is noble now what does that mean that for. Some AI the H AI is equal to 1 and the I equals 2. In this case the second element of H both equal to 1 and that means. When we take the we do this product we can be sure that there's. I see I've done this multiplication wrong let me ok there we've done.

It right so let's check that times 0 is 0 and 0 times 1 is 0 ok but. We pick something that's not 0 well because this one is the one. In the second spot here so that at least the fact that this product is not zero and finally a Q that's P times. One plus Q is not equal to bit interesting the one plus and form is a very human is not noble. So we'll stick with humans and is not noble so let's just look are there any is not noble. The third human is not noble and the some humans which are not noble but.

In particular okay how could we see that algebraically okay plus n now have a look at 1 plus n what happens 1. So in this setting this one means the what's happening well 1 plus 0 is 1 1 plus 1 is what. We get is just the opposite the complement of one in the bool algebra situation is like slightly different. So there is 1 plus N and now a 1 1 yes that's a 1 there's a 0. Then there's a 1 because we see there's a 1 in the first third and of. The humans which are not Noble so the not for this thing being nonzero you see what a great forms of.

The Aristotelian syllogisms these are we've reduced each of them to reasonably simple by that. The B sub-2 to the fifth in of proving all of these syllogisms of. Aristotle to do this okay we can do it next time and just transform. The entire Aristotelian syllogism this algebra going it becomes like a piece of of these are that and. This is I'm trying its computational it's awesome mechanical it's a ambiguity is whatsoever it's just fabulous and going to see. This is exactly the algebra be able to connect with the boolean algebra story happening soon.