# 256 The Algebra of Boole is not Boolean Algebra! (II)

[music] Good day i'm Norman Wildberger we're the algebra of bool and the relation with boolean new face where bull takes classical. Logic from and models the essential aspect of that into ends up having major consequences for 20th century thing further and. I want to point out that there characteristic to relation the fact that. When you get 0 that has the consequence that that also and you add. It to itself you get the zero vector property that boule identified is. This idempotent boule field or the bull by field x squared equals equals.

One that relation is called an equal to itself and it turns out just because any of these bool algebra. So you take any vector or 1 so at every component this rule is applied get. The vector back again all right so this is algebra ok so today we're going to investigate a. Then we're going to apply things to Aristotelian footsteps of Buhl in recasting. This classical see that the algebra is quite simple and I should is not standard. So most people these days have doing something different which is about later but we're gonna see that as somewhat want you to think about is being primary that's us thinking.

In the right direction about boule I talked about in the previous video where. We and various properties on that population and I being athletic being noble and. I had a few others the human property we have five things and. The we said that was the property of being human but nature of. The property we just say that there's but not by the others it's represented algebra. Now let's have a look at what we five dimensional bool space I should remind.

This space is two to the fifth or thirty-two it's and we've chosen three of them. So the first thing subspace spanned by that so thinking this is a but it's still like a vector space. So we can so what happens if we do that if we take a h plus operation. So that's like mod two arithmetic then a one and then we get a another is 0 and. Then a vector if we add h plus n we get 1 and. Then a 0 we add a and n we get 1 1 1 0 1 and.

I guess we can n so that'd be like taking that 1 and adding just get 0 0 0 1 and a 1. So we can picture those and there's the zero vector okay is which is also vectors well that's. This vector that's all zeros there and we have n right there but thinking space but. If we go in this direction there's only then go H if you take h plus h you can back to any of these directions there's always only two that we've created. So there's H plus a there's sum of all of them h plus a plus N and. They span of H a and n we might use that vector space there is.

Some geometry here but it's a by a multiplication as well if we start with these their span but also about. The algebra generated we can get as well as sums to get a larger space products just to get started. If we take H times a 1 0 0 we get just a back itself that's relation between these that. This property is say H times n we would get 0 1 0 0 0. We get a new so there's the span that we got a new vector that a times n. We do the product there we get 0 vector get 0 1 0 1 0.

We get h plus a back again ok here of the ones that you can get. So you can go through you end up getting a four dimensional subspace of span of H a and N and. Then here are the vectors all of these together with the vectors that you. One here H times H + n was this back to here k. We get a plus K we get h plus a plus K n plus. We can think about this as being another cuban and so this is really a hypercube it's a picture 16 element.

So this is like a four dimensional you can check that it's also a describable. In this b4 b5 satisfying the condition that b1 equals b 3 and you can see that that's reasonable vectors had and that property is going to be that's a fast proof to see that you're. This four dimensional subspace why did order to understand the Aristotelian syllogisms and. He was very successful at that so let's various four components or forms that. Aristotle is a P we have these two properties and P that's the first statement and there's an a instead of thinking about. The properties let's every athlete is human that's really coded by the vectors athlete and human vectors.

The a times understanding of this relation now in the bool one side. So we can add Q to both sides that's add another Q if. We add Q to the right hand side get Q P plus Q and. Then the Q can factor out times 1 plus P equals 0 so. This is another way no Q is a P that's expressed by Q P equals 0. So of these things suppose that you had the property this property okay those are two properties and.

In a P that's represented by the fact that you could 0 0 0 0 0 okay. The product of the two vectors is 0 Q is a P that's really sometimes. The opposite is not equal to 0 no Q is a P some Q is a P means going to get a 1 at least. In one place so there's and the final one the old property p oq'. Some Q the opposite of this one every Q is a P that's P that's represented by Q times 1 plus P does not these four relations between essentially q and p. Now these four fundamental forms of Aristotle can done by logicians for a long time probably.

The square of opposition because it interrelates square so every Q is a P or P aq no Q is a P or Q and. Now we have the corresponding algebraic times P equals 0 Q times P does not equal 0 and see. Some of the relations we see that contradictory spell out correctly contradictory does not equal 0 those are mutually exclusive happen and similarly. The relationship between mutually exclusive possibilities either the some relations in this direction and. The logicians a P no Q is a P it's also a opposite as. This one Q times 1 plus P equals P are those are the complements of each.

We now have these Q and P the little Q's and PS Buhl vectors describing properties or types on a. The classical predicates that might be coming from this convention that the little queues and little we're talking about vectors with zeros and ones. So originally had and now we're just talking about will that we can do with them alright. So now we Aristotle syllogisms and we can prove them prove taken the philosophical stuff we've extracted we've modeled. The philosophy with these buuel relations of Aristotle can now be expressed purely of. Aristotle and they then become theorems you a somewhat slightly different version than little bit more concisely but it's really bit.

In modern form and I don't claim that this have probably done this or thought about. It okay be popularized okay I think we need to re-evaluate Barbara let's have a good look at Barbara okay a little AC. So if every B is an A and if every C of all translate these things here into our. In terms of the corresponding bull vectors little times 1 plus a equals 0 and that's equivalent to B out okay. We saw this is the same as this thing goes back to live knits ok that's sort useful and. The second premise here every C is a B B these are the premises these are.

The things that one ok so let's let's do it so we're trying to times a we'd like to see that C equals C times a about. The other thing we can know is that it's there are C times B. Now what we could do well we before so let's use that let's replace. The B with the two premises let's manipulate this stuff here C B times a what do. We know about C B well that's we now have shown that C equals C a there. It is or same as C times one plus a equals zero in other our conclusion.

So you've interpreted the premises bool algebra and we've gotten our conclusion we working. In are we working in B two to the fifth hundred or B 2 to. The 10 trillion okay the algebra doesn't matter which one we're in so. This is kind no matter which situation that were in so this is algebra. All right so let's go through the others know B is an a. Every C is a B implies no C is an A no B is an A that's little a times little B equals you have to have memorized.

The relation between so those are the premises now what we between a and C. We want to show that no C is an that's equal to zero that's what that means. The C with C B there we go and now what are we to replace. The C B with B C and then we're using C but now. The a B is zero so that becomes zero dari which is every bee is an a. Some C is a B that's B equals B a some C is a B that's B times and we'd like to show that C times a is not equal sophisticated here.

So if we just write down a we do is we write down B times AC okay B times AC a is equal to B there. We go so that's BC and then so we've established that the product of B and a property of. The dual algebra that if you have two then both of the vectors must be nonzero right two numbers is nonzero. Then you can conclude that the bull algebra just as it does with ordinary that. This component a C has to be nonzero and so no B is an A. Some C is a B implies some C is so here we go from a B equals zero how do.

We know is this one some C is a B that's B C is not equal a we're gonna be a little bit fancier with relating C and a. So let's consider B times by distributive law this is like b times c plus c. I haven't put brackets here because we know by do we know about. This BCA well we can rewrite it do that what do we have well. The BA or the a over and the other premise is that that is not 0 we've used both premises. So what can we conclude here namely B and C times 1 plus a have to be 1 plus a is not 0 and that's exactly what.

We isn't it pretty everything just school students I think would appreciate why not it's useful great historical significance technology ok but that's only. The first figure we are ones like this where the the first entry as them ok. So I'm going to use the terminology easily and check these syllogism so. If them listed in the format given you here so the X implies any X ok. So the assumptions n every n M e^x is M times x equals 0 ok. So we're now after can we say well the end can be replaced with n m to get n times M X.

The M X is 0 so obviously and ma X implies n e X. So the first one is M and so using those we have 0 equals x times MN why is MN by associate ivities that's X M times n but X that any X done and. The next one is or not the one in between nothing called fist evo it's an a little bit a little bit trickier ma n and mo x ok. So what the premises tell us the first one is is x times 1 plus M does not equal 0 and we're ok. So the proof that I found simplest one I could 1 plus M and. We look at that and we expand the plus n plus M plus n times M ok.

Now we go from ok so we could put an N here and. Then we have an the ends together and then n plus n is 0. So we x times 1 plus M well our other premise tells back to. The original thing and we can conclude zero and that's n o X. So this is great fun and third figure ones so it turns out that. When we talked about yet but it'll be interesting of a complication there's a little bit of an.

Aristotle and subsequent logicians so we're gonna purely algebraically I hope you'll join me for.