# 257 The Algebra of Boole is not Boolean algebra! (III)

[music] Good day I'm Norman Wildbergers and resurrection of bools original thinking so. This century where George Boole takes the logic that building on Aristotle and mathematically models. It an essential mathematical aspect and then studies very powerful idea to take. Some aspect of the mathematically and then apply it back to the is not an ironclad automatic and meaning. When we do that so the correspondence there's a separation between the mathematics situation which is typically a little bit more we're looking at Aristotle's square of which figure. In Aristotle's syllogisms and we bools algebra so let's just remind ourselves is a P here's Aristotle's notation P a.

The algebra Q times 1 plus P equals 0 here is no equation Q P equals 0 and. Some Q is a P that's opposite of the country diction of this. One here Q times 1 plus P does not equal 0 and symbolically syllogisms of. Aristotle and we saw with our last figure and second figure syllogisms of. Aristotle again that I'm reinterpreting boule a little bit a little bit more involved but. The essential want to carry on with this and we're going to there's.

Some additional complication that arises connection with the boolean algebra that ended up bit unfortunately and we'll start to talk about. So how does bools algebra work how do we so let me remind you that Bulls algebra is really an N dimensional space over. The boolean by field it probably should be separate from a field it's different arithmetic really and. Then what we're is 5 just to illustrate things we can describe the beings and these five objects can have P and Q represent properties that these objects. One every Q is a P represented by the equation Q this this situation. So we have two properties are just strings of binary digits zeros and ones represents a property of five things which is on.

The other three so the property is being listed which happens to be on on off on on for. The five with the nature of the properties and it's also or false. So we're separating ourselves from the of deciding what true and false mean. In the world light switch is on or the light switch is off. The aspects so we're just looking at a portion of instead of true or false okay and. This example case every Q is a P what does it mean it means.

So every object that has property Q has property P a Q because there's a 1 there and. It also is a P okay and this is then represented by this equation. We multiplied by 1 plus P which is what you get all the zeros and ones that means. We get 0 0 1 you're going to get 0 because the 1 there is. Then is going to be multiplied by zero there so this the queue position there's a. One in the people so product will be will be zero the second.

One here so here you can see Q is in this case on. In those positions so whenever Q is on P is not on being. The zero vector take the product every time with it so the product is going to be. The zero being a P which Q is a P well if we look at these. One is on for Q and also on for P that's captured equal to zero. So we take the product and we're the second entry of the product that means that.

The idea that there's a Q which is also a P and is not equal to 0 and here's an example of that. So no that's also a P this one here the third one is a Q but not a P. All right so this is an example equation if you take the vector Q and you multiply. So with that 0 0 1 0 1 and you take the product. So it'll be a 1 here multiplying by that 1 and a ones. In the third and fifth positions alright free from philosophical considering this is.

This of zeros and ones all philosophy has been put bool then converts. The Aristotelian syllogisms all right so now let's have a look at Aristotle's that involve a common predicate. In the second of them listed in Wikipedia and we're going to go bit more complicated. So we're gonna leave them which is this one here it says that P is together implies. Some R is a P in terms of bulls notation algebraic equations this. One s times P does not ok so using these we have first of.

All this 1 we can bring the SR to the other side by adding SR to at. The other one so 0 is not equal to s P and we to do. So this s becomes replaced with SR and then P this is supposedly nonzero and that implies that pas R is implies P IR ok. This first one is s times not equal 0 so from these what do. We do we expand equals s same thing but then we look at is same equal to s. So we could replace this with that's not equal to zero okay but.

If this is not factor s times P R and so if the product to two are non zero. So we can conclude that P R design bocardo state that p OS and ras implies P o R. So is not a P okay the O thing is product s times 1 plus R equals 0. So these are the premises and let's look at this will expand this out as usual look at s times a1 plus P. This thing here we rewrite that by replacing the s with s are ok and R by. This factor instead of by the S so we write equal to 0 and.

So we can include that this product that's this one p o r and feresten p es together. One this one is no s is a p and that's s times equal zero these are. The premises so we have to we start with 0 is not equal to SR and. We oh right SP which is zero we add 0 to s we're still from here to here by adding. This zero term SP times R and all of this is not equal to 0 and. So and that's the statement P o are some R is not of at.

The high school level and I think it's it's this this thing it's a good introduction with those other two third figure syllogisms of because. It involves a concept called existential certain types of statements like this that. We have an idea what a mermaid is and we there are different types of set theory look at. The statement and ask the question what there are no mermaids is this a statement. I think probably you could argue in any one of to be made. In all directions but if the answer import with respect to mermaids that's.

The way this question is false then this statement has so what about. Aristotle what does he have to say cases where there are no incidences. So Aristotle knew already that there were no mermaids okay but so there's obviously. Some subtlety here and that syllogisms third figure syllogisms let's pas Ras implies PIR. If every s is a P and every these things into the Bulls algebra what do. We get 0 and this one here is s times 1 plus R equals is that R times P does not equal to 0 can.

We do of all the other ones I've shown you that allows answer is and no there isn't there is no such at. This particular example so we're going back are going to be properties of those objects and means it's a property which is not valid for. All a mermaid and in our population there are to any of the objects but it's still valid to to 1 1 0 0 0 and R equals 0 0 0 1 1. Then let's look P we're going to get 0 obviously because this this will be true and similarly. If we multiply by 0 so the two premises in this example are true and well let's see. We take the product we get 0 0 0 so it does not follow that.

If these two things other words this is a counter example to directiy was aware of. This Aristotle knew that you had way and the way he invoked things is to to eliminating. The possibility of having an empty to none of the objects in our. In our population prove this by inserting an additional assumption not equal 0 that is just an extra assumption that from s times 1 plus P which is s plus s P equals other. One we get that s equals s okay now we are equal to SP because of that and. This S here can R so we get s are P and this is s times R P.

So so we can conclude that R P does not equal 0 so import aspect. We can recover Aristotle's syllogism automatically deal with this situation incident but it just recognizes that sometimes leave you with. The other third figure syllogism ra s implies P o R so please analyze that and see have to add to make. It true so we then basically there are also some fourth figure syllogisms that added later and you can analyze those as well but understanding of. The Aristotelian syllogisms really quite a remarkable accomplishment but by subsequent researchers Charles Pierce was a became morphed to something closer to. The algebra we want to get at understanding what exactly was original algebra and.

This boolean algebra are the connections with both of those algebra s to summarize. The situation here with this little talking about here are two propositions P or n q. So this runs through the four possible relative binary valued functions on some population an for. Some N and then here are the two operations in thinking of these as sums and products of vectors comes down to just doing component wise arithmetic 0 1 1 and 0 crucially and. The product is just mod algebra so boolean algebra is almost the same as. The crucial difference is right here so there are operations with different names okay we're not.

Then we're going to get confused as to what use this wedge and V here and we're and. This is like like an intersection a we do have a Venn diagram type of interpretation is just or. So this is or and this is and so P or this is on or. This is on then this is on this or when this is off is. When both of these are off precisely when both of these are on. In other words happened in this case here and otherwise it's because this corresponds to.

The set idea of P and Q by sets then this P and Q represents. The Union so something is in in this thing here type of interpretation not. The stoical exclusive it's both in P and in Q now we can also look here with these operations and of course. This PQ the picture for them is the same but the picture or over here. We have an exclusive or over here so take P plus Q if we're inside here both P and at. Some level you could say well these are set up an algebra and that would be absolutely legitimate and interesting and useful choices to crucially different and after bool.

The emphasis algebra and to further complicate things when often now at the boolean algebra uses not these. So it's very easy to get confused between the pool so to try to minimize that confusion. We will situation so we can look at the algebra and see we. Now want to assess what the differences are sets okay and also it turns out with implication quite interesting.