# More arithmetic with negative msets ｜ Math Foundations 232 ｜ N J Wildberger

Foreign [Music] I'm Norman Wildberger, and I'm going to be extending this novel arithmetic of ours based on multi-sets, what we might call box arithmetic, in the direction of negative numbers, which we got at by introducing anti-msets, a rather novel arithmetical feature that somehow mysteriously parallels the world of modern 20th-century particle physics with the particle-antiparticle duality or symmetry that seems to pervade the physical world. Perhaps something parallel to that actually sits at the heart of mathematics as well, even though it hasn't really been explored very much. Today, we're going to have a closer look at all this interesting arithmetic with some examples. Let me just remind you that the setup is that we're starting now with our zero world consisting of two objects, not a single zero which is the empty mset, but also the anti-zero denoted with the same notation but with a superscript 'a'. I'm also going to introduce some possible variants that we could use in some situations, one being just to replace the black bounding brackets with red bounding brackets, parallel to what an accountant would do in terms of black and red representing positive and negative assets and liabilities. Perhaps when we're using a typed situation with just on a line, we could also introduce braces, just a suggestion to give us an alternate way of representing anti-msets.

Then we had these two very identical tables for the addition and multiplication: zero plus zero is zero, zero plus anti-zero is anti-zero, and exactly the same for multiplication. Curiously, especially here, this gives us this unusual law that zero times anti-zero is anti-zero rather than zero, which contradicts our experience that zero times anything is always zero. This makes us a little bit uneasy; this is certainly a different  arithmetic than we're used to. As some viewers point out, this can also lead to a failure of the distributive law at this very elementary level with just zeros and anti-zeros. For example, if we look at zero plus zero times anti-zero, well, zero plus zero is zero, so that's going to be exactly this: we're going to get anti-zero. But on the other hand, if we look at zero times anti-zero plus zero times anti-zero, this one's an anti-zero, this one's an anti-zero, and according to this, the sum is then going to be zero.

The usual distributive law, just at the level of these zero objects, is not going to be valid. Now, that does not mean that the actual arithmetic that we're primarily interested in, having to do with numbers and poly numbers and multi-numbers, etc., is also necessarily inconsistent, but it just means that we do have to be rather careful about questions of the logical structure of things. Ultimately, we want proofs and perhaps models of this that will ensure that what we're doing is logically consistent. At this stage here, it's exploratory, and in that spirit, we're going to give you some examples today of these anti-msets that are built up from this anti-zero, and also then negative numbers and then intervals, integral poly numbers, and integer polynumbers, extending the negativity into the world of poly numbers. In some sense, this is like an assembly language approach to arithmetic, , we're going really right down to a  fundamental level here and uncovering structure that's a little bit unfamiliar, even though it does lead to pretty familiar arithmetic, but we get to look at that arithmetic in a new light. Last time, we saw that as a consequence of having anti-zero, we should probably extend this anti-notion to msets very generally, so that for any mset or object M in this arithmetic, there is going to be an anti-object, which we denote by m superscript 'a', which has the property that if M and anti-M are together in an mset, then they cancel out just like an electron and a positron, and we just get an empty mset as a result.

We also saw that this m-a, this anti-M, can be evaluated by essentially adding the anti-zero to M in either order. In particular, this shows that the anti of anti-zero is zero. Extending that  black-red approach to notation, let me suggest that we could use the following  two-dimensional version of that. If here's an mset m, okay, it's a box with a couple of boxes in it. This is an empty box, and this box here has two empty boxes in it. This would be what we would usually call one plus alpha squared in polynumber language if we wrote it out in terms of linear structure.

There's a big mset with an empty mset there, and here's an mset with two msets inside it. If we were looking at this mset and trying to understand its anti-object, so M superscript 'a', then I propose that we could denote that with a red bounding box. We take this thing here and we copy it essentially, with the distinction that the outside box, the containing box, is now red instead of black, but the interior things are just the same as they were over here. In the linear case, that would involve replacing these outside brackets with red brackets instead of black brackets, but crucially, what's inside stays the same. If we didn't have colors at our disposal, we could replace these red brackets with, say, braces or whatever else we wanted to use. I like this two-dimensional representation because our minds are very much oriented to two-dimensional visualization and understanding, and so this makes demonstrating things a little bit easier for us.

If we have something too complicated like this, it's fine for an AI or a computer, but our physiology prefers to see things in this form here. This is actually quite a useful way of illustrating some things. The first use of these anti-objects is to define minus one, or I like to write one bar. One bar, or minus one, is the mset consisting of a single anti-zero, and it has the property that if you add one bar with one, then you're going to get a zero or the empty set. The multiplication of one and one bar follows this  familiar pattern, and then we can extend this negation to natural numbers. If n is a natural number, then we can define n-bar, or minus n, to be one bar times n.

That then introduces an extension of our fundamental objects from natural numbers to integers. We create integers by multiplying natural numbers by minus one. Now we have a wider framework, and it's really this wider framework that is a very pleasant environment with lots of interesting applications. Furthermore, if we have a more general mset, a pure mset M, then we can define its negative also, M-bar or minus M, exactly in the same way: we just multiply by one bar. I remind you that in this world we can always add and we can always multiply msets. There's no requirement that these things necessarily be numbers; those are just the top-level things, but there's a whole range of different, more complicated kinds of objects, and these operations extend to all of them.

We also saw that another way of thinking about this M-bar was that it consists of the mset whose elements are the antis of all the elements of capital M. It's the mset of m-a as m ranges through capital m. Let's do some examples of some simple integer arithmetic: two plus one bar plus four bar. Well, two is the mset consisting of zero zero, one bar is the mset consisting of just the single anti-zero, and four bar is anti-zero anti-zero anti-zero anti-zero. When we add them, we just dump everything out into a single mset, so we get zero zero anti-zero here and then a bunch of anti-zeros further, and then once we have them all in an mset, the zeros and the anti-zeros will mutually annihilate each other. Say that pair will disappear and that pair will disappear, and we're left just with anti-zero anti-zero anti-zero, which we recognize as three bar or minus three.

What about three times two bar? Well, three is zero zero zero, and two bar is anti-zero anti-zero. How do we multiply these? Well, we have to form the big mset consisting of all possible sums of elements here with elements here. We have to be able to evaluate zero plus anti-zero, which we know is anti-zero, and there are going to be six possible such things, so we're going to get that thing, which we recognize as six bar. Let's illustrate the fact that multiplication, and in fact addition also, are not essentially binary operations in this world; they, in principle, are things that can input a whole bunch of things at the same time.

Let's multiply two bar times four bar times one bar. That's anti-zero anti-zero, there's two bar, multiplied by anti-zero anti-zero anti-zero anti-zero, there's four bar, multiplied by just anti-zero, that's one bar. What are we going to have to do? We're going to have to take an mset that consists of all possible sums of elements here, elements here, and elements here. I'm going to take one of these anti-zeros, one of these anti-zeros, and one of these anti-zeros. We're going to add them, so over here on the side, let's just compute this thing: anti-zero plus anti-zero plus anti-zero.

Anti-zero plus anti-zero is zero, and zero plus anti-zero is anti-zero, so this just gives us anti-zero. In fact, more generally, if we had K anti-zeros all added together, then whether we get zero or anti-zero as the final result depends on whether K is even or odd. If there's an odd number of anti-zeros, we're going to get an anti-zero. If there's an even number of anti-zeros, we're going to get a zero. Because the addition and the multiplication tables are the same, that's the same statement if we replace the additions here with multiplications. Anti-zero times anti-zero times anti-zero is also going to be anti-zero.

It's clear what we're going to get here: we are going to get a whole bunch of anti-zeros, a whole bunch of them, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, and so the final result is eight bar. Now we can convince ourselves that the arithmetic that we've cooked up here really does obey the same rules as our usual integer arithmetic with respect to the operations addition and multiplication. Let's go down one level to the poly numbers. I remind you that a poly number is an mset of natural numbers. Let's look at an example. Here's an mset of natural numbers: P is the mset 0 0 2 2 5.

These are all natural numbers, and this has an interpretation in terms of more usual notation as 2 plus 3 alpha squared plus alpha to the five. If we connect with my usual preferred notation for poly numbers, like we use in the algebraic calculus course or that we've talked about extensively in the Math Foundation series, we can think of a poly number like a polynomial as a list, a vertical list, say, typically of coefficients. The actual variable itself is  secondary; it's  implicit. It's really the coefficients that are the crucial thing. Here, there's a two, there's zero alphas, three alpha squares, zero alpha cubed, zero alpha to the fourth, one alpha to the fifth. Let me just point out again the important distinction here between this more classical approach to what a poly number is, namely as a list, and this new point of view, this mset point of view towards what a poly number is.

These are closely connected in the sense that this thing here is really the multiplicity list for this mset. This is keeping track of how many of each of these objects we have because the objects appearing here are naturally ordered; they're natural numbers, so 0, 1, 2, 3, etc. We can encode this information just  by counting how many zeros there are, how many ones there are, how many twos there are, how many threes there are, etc. But there's a sense in which this is actually a more basic or fundamental object because the ambiguity that's appearing over here, that you're allowed to add additional zeros below wherever you are and it doesn't change, is  removed at the multi-set level because we don't have to say that we're just talking about a multi-set. This is a subtle but important shift that I do want you to take on board, that perhaps a poly number is really more fundamentally an mset of natural numbers. Now we want to enlarge that view because now we have integers.

Let's see what happens if we extend this notion to involve integers. Here's the negation of this P. How do we negate an mset of P-bar or minus P? Well, we just take the anti of each one of these. We have zero anti, or anti-zero, anti-zero, anti-two, anti-two, anti-two, anti-five. That's also a poly number, a familiar  poly number, but one involving negative coefficients.

If we wrote it out as a poly number in alpha, it would be two bar plus three bar alpha squared. There's really three alpha squares here, but there's antis here, so it's representing three bar alpha squared and one bar alpha to the five. As a vertical list, we could write minus two, zero, minus three, zero, zero, minus one, or I prefer two bar, zero, three bar, zero, zero, one bar. Notice also that I'm putting the one bar here. We're  forced to here because we don't have a subtraction operation, so it would be wrong for us to say minus alpha to the five. Not wrong, but not really consistent with what we're doing so far.

Far, we really only have addition and multiplication, so strictly speaking, to be consistent, we probably also should put a one here. It's probably a little bit more consistent if we treat all these things  uniformly and treat the ones the same as the twos and the threes. I suppose we could even go one step further and write zeros, zero alpha, etc., but that would be going a bit too far. Anyway, this is the negation of this thing here in an obvious way. We're also allowed to mix and match these things, so we can have a situation where we have a poly number which has both positive and negative coefficients. For example, this Q thing here.

Have a look at it: it's mset 0 1-a, or anti-one, 2-a, and 3. As a poly number, this would be, well, there's a single one, there's a one to the a here, so that's like one bar times alpha, and there's a one bar times alpha squared, and there's a one bar times alpha cubed. What would happen if we added, say, P and Q? Well, we have to put them all together in a big mset. There's a zero here, a zero here, and a zero, so there'll be three zeros. There's a one, an a, there's a two, two, two.

We'll put two, two, two in, and we also have to put a 2-a in, an anti-two, but that 2-a is going to cancel with one of the twos. They're going to go, so we're just going to have two, two, and then we'll get a three and also a five. The result would be three plus one bar alpha plus two alpha squared plus one alpha cubed. If we wanted to, plus one alpha to the five. More colloquially, we would write this or say it as three minus alpha plus two alpha squared plus alpha cubed plus alpha to the five. That would be the more familiar  high school way of saying it, but that does assume that we have a subtraction operation which we're not assuming at this point.

That's the way anti-numbers generate negative coefficients. It's the antis inside the brackets that are generating negatives  outside the brackets. Maybe that's one way of thinking about it. Great, so let's do a little bit of multiplicative arithmetic with these integer polynumbers. Say 2 plus alpha times 3 minus alpha squared. First of all, let's over here just draw a picture of this thing.

What is 2 plus alpha? It's a box that has what in it? Well, it's going to have two empty msets, so we just had that, that would be the number two, but it also has an alpha in it. What's an alpha? An alpha is when you put a one inside this box here. 2 plus alpha looks like this.

Now we're multiplying it by 3 minus alpha squared. What does that look like? Well, that's also a box, and it has a three in it. It's the three zeros in there that makes the three, and then there's a minus alpha squared. What does that look like? Well, an alpha squared would be like when you had a box here with two empty boxes inside.

But we have a minus alpha squared, so I actually need to change colors and introduce a red box because we have a minus alpha squared. I'm going to put a box here and a box here. Have a look at this. If we didn't have this thing here, if we removed those three things and just looked at this big black box with a red box inside it and two black marks, this would be the negation of the thing that we got by replacing this red box with a black box. If we replace the red box with a black box, then we would have alpha squared. Negative alpha squared, you get that by taking this thing here and changing the color of all the ingredients.

In other words, replacing all the ingredients with antis. The minus alpha squared is represented by this big box with a red box inside it containing two black boxes. We could do the arithmetic at the box level. Let's do it in a more regular fashion. 2 plus alpha is an mset; it's a poly number, so it's an mset of natural numbers, or these days, integers. 2 is represented by zero zero, and the alpha is represented by the one.

We have to multiply it. Here's another mset consisting of what? Well, there are three zeros in it, and then there's a minus alpha squared. That's like a two; we're  representing alpha squared, but we have to put an anti-two there because we have a minus one of them. Let's see if we can do this calculation. There are quite a lot of terms here.

There's three times four, so it'll be 12 things altogether. What do we have to do in order to multiply these two things? We have to take all possible sums. Zero plus zero is zero, so i'm going to do zero times only, so i get zero zero zero two, and i'm just adding zero to all of these. I have to do the same thing with this zero, add zero to all of these. Now I have to do the same thing with this one, add one to all of these.

One plus zero is one, and one plus two alpha, so that's interesting here. We need to calculate over here, perhaps in a different color. What is one plus two a? Two a, another way of thinking about that is it's one plus two plus anti-zero, right? Anti, the anti of two. One way of saying what that is, it's two plus anti-zero.

If we write it this way and  we use distributivity, we would get three plus anti-zero, which is anti-three. According to that calculation, we should have a three-a there. In terms of an actual poly number, what poly number is this? We get six zero, so that's six. We have these three ones here, so that's like three alpha, and then we have these two two-a's or anti-twos. That's like alpha squared, but with a minus, so minus two alpha squared, and there's three-a.

Anti-three corresponds to minus alpha cubed. Does that look like what we'd expect? Two times three, three times alpha, yes, minus two alpha squared, yes, and minus alpha cubed. Let's do another example, say one minus alpha cubed. That's going to be what? Well, one minus alpha as an mset in the more familiar way, that's a zero representing the one, and the minus alpha is like a one but with an 'a' here, anti-one.

Times zero, anti-one, times zero, anti-one. We're going to get an mset consisting of all possible triple sums: element here, element here, element here, adding them up. There'll be a zero plus zero plus zero, that'll be one, and then there'll be a zero plus zero plus one-a, and then there'll be a zero plus one-a plus zero. There'll be a zero plus one-a plus one-a, that's four of them, and then with the one-a, so one-a plus zero plus zero, one-a plus zero plus one-a, one-a plus one-a plus zero, and one-a plus one-a plus one-a. What are we going to get when we do all this? The first thing here is zero plus zero plus zero, that's going to be zero.

What's this thing here, zero plus one-a? That's going to be one-a, and in fact, so is that, and so is that, and so is that. We're going to get one-a, and so is this one, so it'll be one-a, one-a, one-a. I dealt with this one here, this one here, this one here, and this one here. What about this thing here, zero plus one-a plus one-a? What is one-a plus one-a?

Anti-one plus anti-one, let's do a little sum over here. Anti-one plus anti-one. One way of thinking about what an anti-one is, it's one plus anti-zero, so maybe we could write it like this. That makes it clear that this is two plus anti-zero. Plus anti-zero is zero, so we're getting two. Anti-one plus anti-one is two.

It's the same  story with the parity; there's an even number of antis, so we're getting something that doesn't involve antis. This thing here is going to give us a two, as is this one, and this one. Oh sorry, not plus, just a single two, and also another two, and another two. Finally, this last one here, three-one plus three-one plus three-one, same  story, but we're getting a three with an anti. If we wanted to write that out as a poly number, let's squeeze it down here, maybe in blue. This is one, there's three of these one-a, so that's minus three alpha, there's three of these, so plus three alpha squared, and there's one of these, so minus a single alpha cubed.

We've done a little binomial expansion in this mset world, but now we're able to move in a different direction, still staying in the world of poly numbers, but we're going to use the fact that we have integers now in a more subtle, more expanding fashion. This leads us to what we're going to call integral polynumbers, or perhaps one could say Laurent poly numbers, but I'm not going to actually use that notation; I'm going to prefer integral poly numbers. An integral poly number is an mset of integers. A poly number, we said before, was an mset of natural numbers like zeros, ones, twos, etc. Now an mset of integers. For example, here P, here's an mset of integers, negative 2, negative 1, negative 1, negative 1, zero, three, three.

We can now interpret this in an algebraic fashion by being  consistent and thinking of these negative sizes just representing powers of alpha which have negative numbers as exponents. This two-bar here is giving us an alpha to the minus two. These things here, these one-bars, are alpha to the minus one. There's three of them. The single zero is a one, and these two alpha cubes, these two threes, give us two alpha cubed. In terms of a box, here's a box that corresponds to this.

There's a box, and it has a two-bar in it. Where's the two-bar? Well, this thing here is essentially the two-bar because a two would look like a box, a black box with two empty boxes inside it. If we want to negate that, what we have to do is we have to take the mset which consists of the antis of all the ingredients. We have to take the antis of the two involved here. This is what the two-bar looks like, and similarly, the one-bars here, that one, that one, and that one, are represented by a black box with a red box inside.

The zero is just represented with the single empty set, and the threes, well, there's three, and there's another three. In terms of our familiar notation for msets, if we just look at the positive part of this, maybe I should put it down a little bit. Let me write it like this. We just looked at the positive part; there's a single one. There's a zero alphas, zero alpha squared, and there's two alpha cubes. That would be our usual poly number representation as a multiplicity list with just positive powers of alpha.

But now we have also three alpha to the minus ones and an alpha to the minus two. We can represent that by essentially going in this other direction, going up from this bar here. There's three here in this position and one here in this position. This is  the alpha to the zero position, alpha to the one, alpha to the two, alpha to the three. This is alpha to the minus one, here's alpha to the minus two. This is  consistent with what we're doing previously, but we're  going in a different direction.

In my next video, I'm going to have to say more about how to think about these integral polynomials, like what do they mean, how do we represent them, or how do we think about them. Let's just do a bit of arithmetic with them to give us an idea of how this works. Let's add two integral poly numbers. Here's an integral poly number, one-bar, one-bar, two. Here's another one, three-bar, one, two, four. To add them, we just make a big mset, dump everything together.

There's a one-bar, there's a one-bar, there's a two, there's a three-bar, there's a one, there's a two, there's a four. We could rewrite this in maybe a slightly more organized fashion, like this: one-bar, one-bar, one, two, two. Oh, there's a three-bar, so we could put maybe the three-bar there. Three-bar, one-bar, one-bar, one, two, two, and four. In terms of interpretation in terms of poly numbers, this would be here. This would be two alpha to the minus one plus alpha squared, that thing there.

This thing here would be an alpha to the minus three plus an alpha plus alpha squared plus alpha to the four. What are we getting out of this? We're getting an alpha to the minus three plus two alpha to the minus one plus alpha plus two alpha squared plus alpha to the four. Does that sound reasonable? Yes, I think it does. Here's another example, a little bit more sophisticated now because we're going to combine these two roles of negative numbers in slightly different ways.

Have a look at this thing here: three-bar, one-bar, two, anti-one-bar, anti-zero, two, three. First of all, let me express the meaning of this in more familiar  poly number language. What is this thing representing? It's representing the poly number alpha to the minus three plus alpha to the minus one. Without the ant here, it would be an alpha square, but there's an anti here, so we have to think of it as being minus alpha squared. What about this one over here?

The one-bar anti, so one-bar is representing alpha to the minus one, but we have an anti, so it's minus alpha to the minus one plus one plus alpha squared plus alpha cubed. When we put them all together, let's do it over here. We just dump them all together: three-bar, one-bar, two, anti-one-bar, anti-zero, two, three. What is that? There's some cancellation that happens because in the same mset we're seeing some objects and their antis. There's a one-bar here, and there's an anti-one-bar; they're going to cancel.

There's a two and an anti-two; they're going to cancel. The three-bar and the three, they are not antis; they're not going to cancel, they stay where they are. We're going to get a three-bar. What do we say? These guys cancel, these guys cancel. We're going to get a zero and a three.

Over here on the polynomial side, we should be getting alpha to the minus three plus one plus alpha cubed. I suppose that's reasonable. Let's do a multiplication: two-bar, one, times one-bar, one-bar, anti-three. In terms of polynomials or poly numbers, this would be, this one here is like alpha to the minus two plus alpha times two alpha to the minus one plus three anti, that's minus alpha cubed. At the level here, what do we have to do? We have to make a big mset consisting of all possible sums of these things, all possible sums.

Two-bar plus one-bar, what is that? Two-bar is the same as minus two, one-bar is the same as minus one. When we add them, we're going to get minus three or three-bar. We're going to get a three-bar, that's sum. This sum is another three-bar. We get two-bar plus three-anti.

Let's think about that. Maybe I could do that over here. Two-bar plus three-anti. The three-anti you can think of as three plus anti-zero. When we do it that way, the two-bar plus the three will give us a one, so we get one plus anti-zero, which is one-anti. Which one was that?

That was this two-bar plus three-anti. Again,  an odd number of antis gives us an anti, but otherwise, it's like two-bar plus three, so it's like one, so we're getting one-anti. We've done three sums so far. We have still one plus one-bar, well, that's zero, one plus one-bar, that's zero, and one plus three-anti, that's the same story as that. The one plus three is four, so we get four-anti. What is this telling us?

We should be getting two alpha to the minus three, that a one plus two plus two a one-anti, so that's minus alpha, and a four-anti, so minus alpha to the four. Does that correspond to what we would expect? Two alpha to the minus three, minus alpha, yes, two, yes, minus alpha to the fourth, I think that's right. It seems as if we have an interesting arithmetic, but now we've used these negative numbers to enlarge our arithmetic or algebra of polynomials or polynumbers in two ways, not just in terms of adding negative coefficients, the possibility of that, but also in terms of adding the possibility of negative exponents. This is a departure from the usual story of polynomials. I'm going to talk more about that in my next video, how to think about that.

We're going to see some new insights into what the world of polynomials and their algebra really looks like. I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening. [Music]