# Multiset arithmetic via trees ｜ Math Foundations 230 ｜ N J Wildberger

[Music] Everyone, I'm Norman Widlberger. Today we're going to look at arithmetic with multi-sets via trees, so we're going to connect with computer science. We have a novel way of thinking about arithmetic where multi-sets are the basic foundational objects, and basically, we create everything just from boxes inside boxes inside boxes. But now we're going to have a more two-dimensional, perhaps somewhat easier to visualize point of view towards them. Here is an example of a pure m-set. We have a lot of nested boxes: here's an empty set, an empty set, or rather we should say empty m-set, empty m-set.

Here's a pair of empty m-sets in a box. Here is a bunch of nested ones and also the same repeated there. Now our notation is that an empty m-set is denoted by zero, so we could replace this with zero. This was zero, then this will be the m-set 0 0. This will be the m-set, that inner one there is replaced with zero, so we have zero inside an m-set inside an m-set. And this is the same as that one, and then we could reduce that a little bit further because this m-set here, the m-set containing 0 and 0, is our number two.

And this m-set containing just a single zero is the number one. These two can be replaced with these ones. This is a  alternate notation. This is  the elemental point of view where we just have m-sets. Here we're introducing natural numbers also. Today we want to see how this arithmetic translates into the world of trees and what  trees are we talking about.

Of course a tree is a graph that is acyclic, doesn't have any cycles in it, so there is a unique  path from any one vertex to another which doesn't repeat itself. And the trees we're talking about are rooted trees, that means they have a distinguished node, and we're going to put that distinguished node at the top, so we can also perhaps say this is like a roofed tree with the root up at the top. Now importantly, this is a little bit different from the rooted trees that appeared in my series on solving polynomial equations. If you've watched that, we solved polynomial equations by introducing a broad extension of the Catalan story, and trees played an important role. But those were planar trees, okay, so these are non-planar trees by which we mean that the actual order on the page that we put these  sub-branches is unimportant. Let's have a look at this one here, okay, it can be represented with this tree here.

This top node represents the outside brackets, and then inside that there are these  subdivisions. There's an m-set, another m-set, another m-set, another one, another one. There's these five  interior m-sets that are corresponding to these nodes here, which is one level down. The lines here just represent the inclusions of m-sets in m-sets. Now these ones here are empty, so we're going to denote them with just a node which is empty, and this one here is represented here, it has two empty ones inside it. This one here has another one inside it, which then contains an empty set, and this one is similar.

This representation is not unique because we can interchange the orders of things. This is an alternate representation where we've taken these  two branches, if you like, , and brought them on the other side. I've brought these to the other side. Okay, so these are equal. Now in our connection with algebra, we've seen that an m-set of this kind really corresponds to an algebraic object, a relatively familiar algebraic object. This is the number two, the two zeros here, and this two that's appearing in the m-set corresponds to alpha zero squared, where alpha zero is some  basic variable that's introduced in the poly number context here.

And these two m-set ones that are appearing inside here give us 2 alpha one corresponding to a second variable alpha one. We end up with an algebra, not just in one variable, but with an unbounded number of variables corresponding to natural numbers. And so we want to see today how this algebra,  polynomial algebra, corresponds to the tree story and how the tree representation sheds light and gives us new ideas about the structure of this mathematics. Now rooted or roofed trees are very important objects in combinatorics, but they also play a very important role in computer science, where they're often used to store data structures in convenient ways that allow for you nice search and sorting and so on. Let's just review some standard, probably familiar terminology in the context of rooted or roofed trees. Here's that same one that we had before, and so that node up at the top will be called the root, and it has the property that it doesn't have any parents.

The relationship between a node like this and a node directly below it is that of parent and child. The top one is the parent, and the one below is the child, okay. And those nodes which don't have any children, so they're  at the bottom of some branch, are called leaves. A leaf has no children. And then there's also this concept of height and depth. The height is the number of steps that you need to go down to get to the furthest leaf below you.

For example, if you're here, , you go down one step. This is at the height of one, this is also at the height of one, this one here is also at a height of one because that's the maximum that you can go down to get to a leaf. There's another corresponding concept which is depth. It's a let's say you're swimming in an ocean, okay, you're inside the ocean, the height is how far you are from the bottom of the sea floor, let's say, and the depth is how far you are from the surface of the water. Okay, so the depth is measured how far we have to go up to get to the root. The root has depth zero and say these ones here are of depth two, so we have to take one, two steps to get to them from the root.

Okay, so those just some basic terminology from computer science. I should mention that this development of arithmetic is somewhat new here, right? We don't have a lot of experience with this yet, so perhaps some of the things that I'm telling you are to be thought of in a provisional fashion. We're  exploring this territory. I wouldn't say that anything is set in stone. We're still trying to find the  optimal ways of structuring this theory, and it's possible that I might make some mistakes, so I hope that if I do, you will correct me.

And along the way, I'm going to try to introduce perhaps some terminology or notation which I hope will help us in this exploration. That's what I want to do today. Here just with this slide, I want to introduce a  multiplicity convention that will make it perhaps a little bit easier for us to display things. It's very easy to get overwhelmed with all the brackets and such that we have. Here's that same m-set that we were considering, and we could write it out as a sum, okay, because there are two of these, , these ones here. And, , and then we could, , write this one here, that's that one, and then there are two of these guys here.

So, , we could then, ,  think about this in another way by starting with the same big outside m-set and representing these two empty m-sets in here by a single m-set with a a little subscript two, a left sub index, okay, so to the left and down. And this here is telling us that there are two of these guys in this bigger m-set. Similarly, this one here, these guys here, there's two of them, so we could also represent that with a two, okay. That's just a little convention that we could use, especially useful if we have a lot of repetitions, like if we're dealing with much bigger multiples, that we don't want to physically exhibit, , 300 different copies of the same thing, much easier just to put a little 300 under there. Note that we can also in fact go a little bit further and actually replace this one also if we wanted to, because we have two empty m-sets in here, so we could rub off one of them and just put a little two to the left of the other one. This corresponds in the tree world also to a corresponding convention.

Here is our original a, and we could then maybe represent this a little bit more efficiently by saying, okay, look, there's two of these empty m-sets coming from the root, okay, why don't we just write one of them and put a little two beside that node, also to the left and maybe a little bit down, representing that this child here is to be thought of just as one of a pair, there's actually two of them. And here's another pair of branches that are  the same. This is a subtree from here and from here, they're the same, okay. Instead of writing both of them out, we could just write one of them out and put a little index there representing that there's two of them, okay. That  corresponds to that one there. And then we could actually also go one step further.

If we did the rubbing out here, then these two here that are out, , coming from this one here, we can replace them with a single one also with the two, okay. I just offer this as a potential labor-saving device that will make it easier for us to make expressions both in this m-set point of view and also in this tree language. In my last video, i also introduced the idea of counting, and there are different kinds of counting functions, starting with zed, and then we had an n counting function, a p counting function, and m counting functions,  corresponding to the different levels of zero number, poly number, multi number, okay. They have a nice interpretation in this tree language. Let's look at our example again. There's our m-set a, they're written out in the usual way here in the tree form.

The z counting function is very simple, just takes any m-set and sends it to zero, the empty m-set. n of a, which is the closest to our regular counting function, is this m-set, is the m-set of z of a's, set of little a's where little a belongs to capital a. What we have to do is we have to take all of the constituent elements, that one, that one, that one, that one, and that one, and replace them all with empty sets or empty m-sets. There they are, they're an empty m-set, the same as zero. Similarly, we just say that we're replacing each of them with zero, and then the resulting m z is the number five. And what we're doing there in terms of the diagram, you can see, has a very natural, simple  representation.

What we're doing first of all with z of a is we're just looking at the top of it, okay, the top of it, and there's a single node there, and so that's the zero node. And when we, so that's  like zed. And then when we go to n of a, what we're doing is we're just going down one level, to the level one, or maybe we can say to the depth one. That means we're  chopping it off there and looking at everything above that, okay. If we just chop the whole thing there, then we get a much simpler m-set which just has five leaves coming out of the root, and that's then the number five. That corresponds to the counting function n.

And what about p of a? Well, that's defined to be the m-set n of a where a is in a. And so there, what we have to do is we have to look at in each one of these and replace each one of them with, , the n of them. The n of this is, is zero, and if this is zero, so we're just putting those zeros. n of this, well, to do that, we have to replace all the things inside it with, with zeros, okay. Just get zero zero, but this one here, we have to replace this, the thing that's inside here with a zero.

Instead of having a three nested brackets, we end up only with two nested brackets. This one and this one end up simplifying to m-set zero and m-set zero. And what that amounts to is truncating the story at that level. We're going down to depth two but no further, okay. That's, that's our p counting function. The p counting function looks at everything above that.

It says p of the m-set is just what you get when you truncate right there, the thing above it is p of a. That's a very attractive way of counting, and of course it's obvious how to extend that to further depths or further levels. In this case, m of a, well that's the m-set of p of a's, a in a. That turns out to be all of a in this case, and that  corresponds to chopping off at that level there. That's the m, and since this thing here is a multi-number, okay, because it's, , it's an m-set of poly numbers, so the m counting function actually just outputs, , the, the m-set itself. The general rule here that we're seeing is that in this world at the level of trees,  geometrically, these various counting functions just correspond to truncations.

And that makes arguments about the  functorial properties that the counting functions have with respect to the operations a lot easier to, to  see, because we just have to ask them what happens if you, if we look at addition or multiplication to you up to a certain level, okay. That's a nice aspect of the two-dimensional visual approach that we get with the tree point of view. I want to introduce another idea which I think is useful here, the idea of taking a box, which might have stuff inside it, and  closing the lid so that you can no longer look inside and see what it has in it. Maybe you can shake it, , but now we're just  thinking about a box which may have stuff inside it, but that content is maybe not visible to us. I want to talk about the idea of closed boxes or correspondingly closed nodes in the tree version. Here again is our familiar a, okay, there's a  more succinct way of representing it.

Here's another way of thinking about what a is  geometrically, which is really more in the line of boxes. Here the boxes are represented by rectangles. There's the big rectangle which corresponds to that one up here, and then these five here are the five elements of a which themselves are rectangles or squares. And these ones here are empty, and this one here has two boxes inside it which otherwise are empty. And these ones here both have a box inside, but that box is not empty, it rather has another box inside both of them. This is also a very attractive way of thinking about things, also has a bit more of a two-dimensional aspect.

What we want to think about now is another way of  condensing this  thing, because in principle, these things could be very big, right? We don't want to be writing these trees down if we really need to in all their messy details, especially if they have lots of branches with a lot of depth. We could maybe represent this thing in a bit a more succinct way by replacing one of these nodes with just a letter representing the contents, representing that box and its contents. For example, let's consider this one here. When we look at this node here, okay, i want you to think about this note as not really so much a node, but actually as a sub-tree. I want you to think about this thing here as representing the tree that's emanating from that point.

In other words, the tree that has that as a root, okay. That's that one along with two edges and these two, two down here. That's like a little sub-tree, okay, in fact, there it is. There, and you can  see that's what's called b. What we can do is in this diagram here we can replace this sub-tree with just a single node which is the root of it, and we put a little, say, box around it, okay, and letter b, telling us that what we've done is we've made a substitution or we've  rubbed some stuff out, and this is then a placeholder for some additional stuff which is perhaps off the page or is recorded in memory somewhere else, okay. In this case here, we see there's a little square around it, meaning there's actually more stuff, there's another tree coming from that node, but we have to find it somewhere else.

And so we look over here, okay, here's b, so then we could recover this by putting that back in. Similarly, this one here, that node there is replaced with a little square around it, and we forget about the stuff below, and the letter c, , so this is representing this  sub-tree, node, node, and a leaf there. This is a more efficient way of representing this thing that  compresses some of the information perhaps that we don't really need. Now there's a corresponding way of thinking about that over here, in the sense of what we're doing is we're  closing the boxes, okay, but recording the contents of the box somewhere else. Corresponding to what i did over here, this b one over here is this one here. Going from this diagram to this diagram, what i've done is i've  shaded the box so you no longer can see inside.

There's something inside, perhaps it doesn't have to be, but there could be something inside, but we don't know what it is. But over here in different locations, we see that actually this box is actually this one here. And similarly this box c which has also been shaded so we lose the information, but it's over here somewhere, okay. This is a way that if we're doing certain manipulations and we don't actually need to know what the  finer structure is inside these boxes inside other boxes, okay, we might be making a calculation that only requires us to look at things down to a certain depth, and what's below that is  irrelevant for the actual computation we're interested in. This  representation or simplification, i think, can be helpful in that  context. You see there's a natural parallel between what we're doing here in the tree world and what we're doing here in the more familiar  m-set or box world.

Okay, so now let's get to the arithmetic with trees, and I'm just going to give you this one slide which has a lot of information and some computations, and I'm going to go through it and I hope that you can check and see that I've done it correctly. I have to admit here that, , i'm not that familiar with this entire world. I'm  just making the initial forays into it myself, and I have to admit that I often get a little bit confused making these calculations. We just have to where exactly are we, , and what level are we, etc. If i feel a little bit like perhaps an intelligent but primitive person who has never been to school might feel when they're subjected to primary school mathematics and they have to learn arithmetic for the first time, it's not that hard, but, , there's these various conventions and you have to do quite a lot of practice actually before you get reasonably good at it. After all, in primary school we spend some years learning basic arithmetic, addition, subtraction, multiplication, etc.

Even with just natural numbers, so there's a fair amount to learn there. But it is admittedly of an elementary nature, but still the unfamiliarity of it probably does require some practice. Actually in that direction while i'm talking about that, maybe i could ask some of my viewers to think about, if you're interested in this topic, of creating some resources that will help us to  gain some experience in this world. I think it would be nice to have some problem sets like little homework exercises that we could do, maybe with solutions which have been carefully worked out so that we can see whether our intuition is a good one. Okay, so here's an example of such a thing. Here are two m-sets, a and b, represented in tree form.

Okay, so here's the root, we have three children, one of them is a leaf, the other two have some branches, that's of depth two, and that's one that's depth three. In terms of our familiar  algebra notation, this corresponds to an algebraic expression in our variables, well, in numbers and variables. Okay, in this case, 1 plus alpha 0 plus alpha 1. The one corresponds to that leaf down there, okay, so that's just a single zero inside the big m-set, that corresponds to the number one. This thing here, it's like an m-set inside the big m-set, there's an m-set which has a single zero in it, so that's like this. This combination here is one, but it's inside the bigger m-set, so it has the interpretation of alpha zero.

And when we go one more, so when we have an m-set inside an m-set with a zero in it, then that's alpha one. Over here, b, we have another one, so there's the root and there's a leaf coming down there, and here's a node which has two leaves coming out here. This thing here by itself is the number two, but when the number two is appearing as, , down from the root, it has to be interpreted in a different way, okay. That's like the number two in an m-set, that's different from the number two. That has the interpretation of being alpha zero squared in terms of this fundamental variable, the zeroth variable, alpha zero. This is 1 plus alpha zero squared, that's an interpretation of that.

Okay, so here are the various operations that we know so far how to do, and so the simplest one is of course addition, where we just take these things and add them. And what we're doing there, one way of thinking about it is we're just, we're just  chopping these things off here, and then taking these, the constituent entries, which are themselves little trees, okay, and we're just putting them all together. This tree right here gets copied, that's a new element of this, this new m-set, okay, this one here gets copied, and this one here gets copied. Similarly, this one gets copied and this one here gets copied. Okay, so you could think about it perhaps as a  way we're  snipping or cutting those edges there, and cutting those edges there, and taking those five edges and putting them together within a new node. That's the tree version of taking the contents of these two m-sets and dumping them out into into another box, okay.

A times B, this is a times B, and how do we get that? Well, what we have to do is we have to look at the elements of a. There are three elements of a, each of them is themselves a tree, and there are two elements of b, each of them is itself a tree, and we have to take all possible combinations of elements of a and elements of b, like pairs, maybe that tree and that tree, and we have to add them, they're m-sets so they can be added. For example, when we do that, we take this thing here which is really like the m-set which is what we're calling one, and this is the m-set zero, and we add one and zero, we get one, okay. The effect of adding this and this is just to get this, so that's why that's appearing over there. And similarly, this plus this tree is, it's this one here, and this one plus this is also this one here, okay.

Now the next three are obtained by taking these three and adding this one to it, okay. For example, if we take this tree here, and we take this tree here, and we add them. This is a tree with one leaf, this is a tree with two leaves, we add them, we get a tree with three leaves. When we add this one and this one, we get a tree that has a root there, and then it has this sub-tree coming down, and also two leaves coming out. And finally, when we add this to this, well this is zero again, so we're just getting our thing that we started with there. This is a times b, and what is it algebraically?

Well,  read through things, this one here is one, okay, and this one here is a one but it's contained in a big bracket so that's alpha zero. This is alpha one. This one here is, okay, this one here is maybe the next simplest one. This one here is alpha zero squared, okay. This one here is alpha zero cubed, and this one here is a combination of alpha zeros. There's two,  two of them, so alpha zero squared there, but there's also an alpha one, so it corresponds to this polynomial in alpha zero and alpha one.

And what about a caret b? Okay, so we're going to change our notation just a little bit. I was talking about exponentiation, maybe that's not really such a great terminology. A number of viewers have suggested that, and I think that's reasonable, but I  like this symbol, so I'm going to stick with a suggestion that a viewer made, that we stick with this thing here and call it the caret, c-a-r-e-t, okay. A caret b, what is that? By definition, what we have to do is we have to take these things here and take the various sub-trees, the elements of this one, the elements of this one, and we have to pairwise multiply them, multiply them, not add.

Over here we were adding them, here we have to multiply them. For example, we have to take this sub-tree and multiply it by this sub-tree, okay. But this sub-tree is zero, when we multiply something by zero, we get zero. We get a zero, zero, zero. The first three are going to be zeros, in fact we're going to get another zero because, because when we multiply this one by this one here, we also get a zero. The two that are non-trivial are the product of this and this, which is this and this and this.

Let's just check that. The product of this tree and this tree, how do you take the product? Well, you have to look at all possible pairs of sub, or elements. This one has one element, this one has two elements, so we have to take a pair like this and we have to add them, all right. Zero plus zero is zero, zero plus zero, zero. We're getting two possible zeros, and when we do the same thing over here, we have to take this tree, okay, starting from there, and this tree, and we have to multiply them.

How do we do that? Well, we have to take the elements of this one, there's only one element, namely the tree starting there, and there's two elements of this one, and we have to add those, okay. When we add this one with this one, well, we just get this thing, and when we add it with this one, we get this thing because zero plus anything is the anything, all right. That's what we end up getting by taking this combination with this combination, multiplying, multiplying this tree with this tree. And what does this look like algebraically? Well, this is a four, this is alpha zero squared, same thing like that.

And this thing here is, well, , this was like an alpha, alpha one, and we have two of them coming out here, so that's like alpha one squared. That's the way the caret operation works on these things, which is, , a little bit strange to us. Admittedly, this is a  a strange new arithmetic. We're in a  unusual world here. The natural question though is, is this a consistent world, and is it an interesting world? Well, if we just restrict ourselves to addition and multiplication, it's certainly useful because we're recovering polynomial algebra in actually an unbounded number of variables.

That's already a very rich discipline, and in fact in our next video, we're going to see that this becomes even much richer when we take the big step to extending our number system to include negative numbers. A lot of viewers have asked me how are we going to do that, and it's a really interesting question, and i'm going to show you next time. And we're going to see that that really again expands our vision in quite a fascinating way. Hope you'll join me for that. I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.

[Music]