# Negatives numbers from anti msets ｜ Math Foundations 231 ｜ N J Wildberger

Foreign [Music] I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for joining me. We are in the process of largely outlining a new approach to arithmetic, and today, a very important and interesting lecture where we try to tackle the problem of how to create negative numbers in our system. It's quite a long lecture today; there's quite a lot of stuff in it. I'm going to also say a few philosophical or meta-mathematical things beforehand to  set the stage. Also, there's a tentative aspect or an aspect of this being a proposal.

It's not that we have a current, valid, logically correct theory established yet, so we're working towards that. There will be an element of exploration today as we discover things, perhaps for the first time. We're going to be introducing negative numbers from a notion called an anti-multi-set. The basic idea is contained already in a prior lecture in the Math Foundation series, notably Math Foundations 187: The Curious Role of Nothing in Mathematics and the subsequent videos following that. What i'm doing today is largely an extension or modification of what i did there, where i already introduced the notion of anti-objects and the important role of nothing in this multi-set framework. We're modifying things by not having the mark as the central fundamental object but as the empty mset, or zero, as the fundamental thing.

Otherwise, you'll see there's a lot of parallel to this. If you're interested in this situation, which I hope you are, please go and have another view of this video or look at it for the first time if you haven't already done so. Currently, we have a framework that  goes on but starts at a very simple level: just the zero multi-set, which is an empty multi-set. We have natural numbers, which are just msets of zeros: one, two, and three. Then we have poly numbers, which are msets of natural numbers. That one there is called Alpha Zero.

Here's another one; it's an mset of natural numbers which we can interpret as the polynomial 2 plus Alpha Zero plus Alpha Zero cubed. And then multi-sets of poly numbers like this thing here: this is an mset of poly numbers because that's a poly number, that is, and that is. It has the interpretation of a polynomial in more than one variable: Alpha Zero squared corresponding to that, plus two Alpha One Alpha Two corresponding to these two elements, plus Alpha Four corresponding to this one. We can go further; we have quite an obvious  inductive or sequential process in extending not just objects but also operations to further levels down. We also have a nice way of visualizing this  thing in an alternative way using trees in the language of computer science. Notably, the objects that are appearing here—there are numbers appearing, but they're all natural numbers.

Today, we want to move to try to extend our number system to include negative numbers. That's a very interesting challenge. Broadly, our aim is to introduce a new number: minus one, which i'm also going to write as one bar. Actually, for a lot of purposes, I prefer this bar notation for negative numbers, and I'm going to largely be following that. I urge you to also consider using that. It's very useful because then this minus sign is not confused with the subtraction operation, and it also minimizes the necessary use of brackets in a lot of situations.

In either case, I'm going to use one bar. Typically, what we want to establish about this number is that ordinary one plus one bar equals zero and also that one bar times one bar equals one. Those are two crucial properties of this new number that we're trying to introduce. After we have one bar, we're going to introduce more general negative numbers so that we get a  integer number line with the natural numbers extending to the right like this and negative numbers: one bar, two bar, three bar, etc. We want the usual laws of arithmetic that are familiar to us in the natural number domain to extend to this larger domain of integers. Then, as part of this process, we want to extend these numbers to poly and multi and beyond so that poly numbers and multi numbers and further things may also use these negative numbers as constituents to build up these more complicated structures.

We end up with an extension of the usual laws of algebra to incorporate negative numbers, and hopefully, we'll get some new insights in this way. Let me say a few words about negative numbers. It's important to realize before we start that negative numbers have been a source of insecurity, questioning, and skepticism for a long time. Most ancient civilizations, even if they were reasonably proficient with arithmetic and algebra (for example, even going back to the Babylonians but also the Greeks, Arabs, and Chinese), had ways of avoiding the explicit usage of negative numbers. For example, if we want to solve the equation x squared plus x minus one equals zero, that quadratic equation, they would have preferred to rewrite it as x squared plus x equals one so there are only natural numbers appearing. This unsureness about what negative numbers are and what their role is extends even into the modern era.

Descartes, Rene Descartes, famously the father of modern geometry and a key figure in 17th-century mathematics, was dubious about the role of negative numbers and explicitly tried to avoid them in his geometry. The usual cartesian coordinate axes that we teach undergraduates as being, , a result of descartes' thinking actually, with its usage of a number line with both positive and negative values, is a little bit foreign to descartes' thinking. He preferred to think in terms of having two axes labeled by positive numbers. He restricted himself to what we might call the  upper quadrant. We have to have some respect for the difficulty in establishing a sound theory of integers. You might like to think personally, just yourself, about how you go about establishing a proper theory of integers.

I know you've all learned about integers somewhere in primary school and you've  been taught these rules, , and perhaps you can remember back in grade five or whatever when you were told that minus two times minus three is plus six. Maybe you were asking, well, if -2 represents a debt, like instead of having two apples, I have minus two apples, meaning that I owe somebody else two apples, what does it mean to multiply minus two with minus three and get plus six? How do we really establish the laws of arithmetic in this integer domain? Have you actually gone through that yourself? Even if you're a professional mathematician, chances are you probably haven't. This is something that we  assume as a background.

We all have faith in this, but do we actually have a coherent theory? That's the starting point here. We have to recognize that there's something potentially problematic or difficult or challenging about negative numbers, and today I'm going to be challenging you further by introducing them to you in a very novel way that, surprisingly, ultimately relies on 20th-century physics for its intellectual support. Let's begin our exploration and try to deduce what likely we have to have if we want to have a consistent theory of negative numbers extending this multi-set arithmetic that we already have. The primary thing that we're aiming for is, first of all, a minus one or a one bar. Let me remind you that in our system, the number one is the mset consisting of zero, and zero, of course, is the empty mset.

This new thing that we're interested in, this minus one or one bar, is also going to be an mset because all of the things in our world so far are msets. We posit that this is a new mset with something in it, but we don't know what that thing is that's inside here. Let's represent it with a question mark. What do we need to happen? We want that one plus one bar is zero. One, that's the mset zero.

One bar is this mset with a question mark in it. We have to add these two things. How do you add msets? Well, you dump them both out into another mset. We're creating a new mset, and the zero goes in that mset, and this question mark, whatever it is, also goes in there. We want the result of that to be zero, which is the empty mset.

This question mark has to have the property that if you put it in a box with zero, the result is an empty box. That's necessarily what's required in our framework. There's no getting around it. This is a very unfamiliar situation to mathematics in the last 10,000 years. There's nothing in mathematics that's really like this that gives us any  prior intuition about such a thing. We don't have situations where we have one thing being completely canceled with something else to create nothing.

Not zero, but nothing. This zero and this question mark are creating nothing. But 20th-century physics, completely remarkably, has discovered such a phenomenon. Crucially, it's one of the most important developments of 20th-century physics: the discovery by Paul Dirac of anti-particles, starting with the anti-particle for the electron, which is called the positron. It's a particle that is very similar to the electron in most aspects—it has the same mass, same spin, that  thing—but crucially, it has opposite charge. Moreover, it has this property that if an electron and a positron get close together, they mutually annihilate each other in a flash of light with some photons being emitted.

They have rest energy; that energy has to go somewhere, and the energy is carried off by two photons going in opposite directions so that linear momentum is conserved. This is a totally remarkable thing, especially when it became clear that this is not just a phenomenon involving electrons and positrons. The positron was found a few years after Dirac postulated its existence. Moreover, and  spectacularly, it's now the case that it appears that almost every particle that is known—all these elementary particles—has corresponding antiparticles which essentially have the same  relation. They more or less share most of the properties with the original particles, except that when you bring two of them together, the particle and the anti-particle mutually annihilate each other, releasing some  energy. This is a remarkable thing, and I have to say more about that, but that's really our motivating idea.

This is exactly what we're needing here, minus the energy transmission. Zero combined with something gives us nothing. We're going to introduce such a new object into our mathematics. We have to create an anti-particle for our fundamental object, which is zero, the empty mset. I'm going to give it the name zero with an "a" above it, "a" of course standing for anti-particle. We're going to call it anti-zero.

The anti-zero is this expression; it's a new symbol, with the property that if you have an mset containing zero and zero-a, they mutually cancel each other out, and we just get an empty mset. The question is, well, what actually is this thing? We're not going to answer that question any more than to say, well, it is only a symbol. We're dealing with a language of symbols, and just like this is a  symbol, this is a new symbol that we're introducing so that we're able to ultimately come up with a minus one. It's pretty well necessary if we're going to do arithmetic in this multi-set framework. Curiously, if this arithmetic had been discovered centuries earlier, then probably the physicists would have been much more inclined to discover the anti-particle  symmetry that exists in nature, which is such a profound and remarkable symmetry, perhaps earlier.

Along the lines of the physics, I do have to remark one more additional thing, however, that this symmetry we have is a broken symmetry in that the actual world we live in is predominantly made out of matter particles and not antimatter. Antimatter is something that we only can cook up under rather extreme circumstances or perhaps in cosmic rays or something, but it's not typical. At least as far as we can see, everywhere we look, we see matter, not a lot of antimatter. This imbalance between the matter and the antimatter is a huge problem for physicists and cosmologists. It's one of the central problems in 21st-century physics: to explain this apparent asymmetry between these two kinds of things, which otherwise seem to be quite parallel. Now I want to explore with you some consequences of this fundamental idea of having this somewhat symmetrical object anti-zero added to our arithmetic.

We're going to develop some consequences, but I want to emphasize that this is in an exploratory fashion. We do not know actually if this proposed arithmetic that I'm laying out here for you actually is a consistent arithmetic. We do not know that. We would like that to be true, and maybe there are some indications that it might be, but this is still a very important question, and we can't get around it. In particular, what we are definitely not allowed to do is what the modern analysts do with respect to real numbers, which is basically to say, well, we don't actually have a proper foundation for real numbers, so let's just stomp our feet and  axiomatically suppose that we have a set of real numbers that obey the following pleasant properties that we would like to have happen. We are not allowed to do that.

We have to establish everything correctly in a bona fide way. There's a lot of work to be done here in first of all checking whether or not what I'm proposing actually makes sense, and maybe it doesn't. It may be one of you will next week discover some contradiction. It's possible. I'll wear that. That'll be fun; then we can revamp things or look in an alternate direction or see how we have to modify things.

But we're not just going to assume that what we want to be true is going to be true just because we want it to be. Sorry, analysts, but we want to do things correctly here. Let's proceed with some possible implications of the existence of this anti-zero. Let's look at this equation: one times zero equals zero, which is a valid equation in our system so far. We want that still to be valid. This is a basic idea that all of the prior arithmetical rules that we currently have for the objects that we currently have, we want them still to be valid even when we're extending the arithmetic to include these new kinds of objects.

Here is one; it's the empty set contained in the set, and zero, of course, is the empty set. Now crucially, this empty mset can be replaced with the mset consisting of zero and anti-zero. This is like what the physicists call particle-antiparticle creation. This is an important idea that to the physicist, nothing like a vacuum is not exactly completely empty because, bubbling out of the vacuum, you can create these particle-antiparticle pairs just like we're doing here. This is very parallel to roughly the kinds of things that they're doing. This has to still be a reasonable rule.

What happens when we apply the usual laws for multiplying this thing by this? Well, the usual law is that we should take the mset consisting of sums of elements here and elements here, so that would be zero plus zero and zero plus anti-zero. Zero plus zero is zero, and zero plus anti-zero, we don't know what that is yet, but we do know that the result of this thing had better be the right-hand side, which is the empty set. This object, zero plus zero-a or zero plus anti-zero, had better be anti-zero because we want it to cancel with this zero to get nothing. We get a rule: zero plus anti-zero is anti-zero, and if we did it the other way around, symmetrically, anti-zero plus zero is anti-zero. There we have a first rule of arithmetic combining this new object anti-zero with a prior object zero.

Let me remind you that this is  consistent with the way we think zero works: when we take zero and we add it to something, we get that other something. Here's another rule that we want to have satisfied: zero times zero is zero. Empty mset times empty mset should equal empty mset. But this empty mset can be thought of as the mset 0-anti-zero. Similarly, this one is zero-anti-zero. When we think about it this way, to multiply those two, we have to form all possible pairs and add them.

We have to have zero plus zero as one entry, zero plus anti-zero as another entry, anti-zero plus zero as another entry, and anti-zero plus anti-zero as another entry. Zero plus zero is zero. Zero plus anti-zero, we've just established that's anti-zero. This one here is also anti-zero. But anti-zero plus anti-zero, we don't know yet what that is. Nevertheless, we can do some cancellations because this zero and this anti-zero are together in this mset, so they are going to mutually annihilate each other, so they're gone.

What we have left is a single anti-zero there, and this combination anti-zero plus anti-zero. Hopefully, we're going to get the right-hand side, which is the empty mset. Again, we must have some mutual cancellation. We have an anti-zero here, so this thing here had better be zero because that's the thing that annihilates with anti-zero to get nothing. We can conclude that anti-zero plus anti-zero equals zero. For our next derivation, let's do something similar to what we just did but a little bit more generally.

Let's consider an mset consisting of some object M, where M is some mset or object in this arithmetic. We're again multiplying it by zero. Typically, we want that to be zero. That's what we  expect. In terms of msets, there's mset M. Zero is, of course, just the empty mset, and that again can be replaced with the mset consisting of zero and anti-zero.

When we now do this multiplication, we get something similar as before but a little bit more generally. We get M plus zero as one of the entries, and M plus anti-zero as the other entry. M plus zero is M, and here we have M plus anti-zero. The right-hand side ought to be the empty set, so we see that for any mset or object M in this arithmetic, if this is going to be valid, then there has to be an object that cancels M in the same way that anti-zero cancels zero. This is a huge extension. We are necessarily forced to recognize that this particle-antiparticle symmetry extends far beyond the zero-anti-zero pairing, just like Dirac's electron-positron  symmetry actually ended up extending much further, to in fact general particles.

In fact, these days, it's recognized that that's valid even at the atomic level and, in principle, even at the molecular level and even at the level of human beings. It's possible that there could be an anti-Norman, exactly more or less the same as me, but made entirely of antiparticles. The same  thing is happening here. We have this big enlargement of this symmetry, with this divide between matter and antimatter at the physical level, between msets and these anti-msets in this arithmetical framework. What should we call this thing? Well, obviously we should call it M with a superscript a.

We'll call it anti-M. We want this anti-M to have the property that if you have M and anti-M in an mset, like they're just objects in an mset, they find each other and they cancel; they're gone, and we just get nothing inside this empty mset. What we've established up here is that this particular combination, capital M plus anti-zero, is going to be this anti-M. In other words, this anti-M is actually M plus anti-zero. We could do it another way around: anti-zero plus M. In particular, if you have M being anti-zero, you play the same game with anti-zero, which is an object in our world, then the anti of the anti-zero should be zero because if we replace M here with anti-zero, then over here we have anti-zero plus anti-zero, which we've just established is zero.

That establishes that if we take the anti of zero and then we take the anti of that, in the following sense that i've just described, then we're going to get back zero. Now I'm going to play a very similar game to the previous ones, except that I'm going to move up or down in the operation ladder. Instead of thinking about multiplication, I'm going to think about the carrot operation. Let's look at the equation one carrot zero equals zero, which is a valid equation in our system. If it's a valid equation, then it should still be valid after we replace the empty set here on the left-hand side with the set 0-anti-zero. When we do this carrot operation, let me remind you that what we're doing is we take all possible pairs and we have to multiply them.

We have to take zero times zero and zero times anti-zero. Zero times zero is zero, so this thing here, again, since we want this to be zero (maybe I should write that we want this to be zero), it follows that this combination, zero times anti-zero, had better be anti-zero. And the other way around, anti-zero times zero equals anti-zero. I've put triple exclamation marks here, so please make note of this. This is an unfamiliar aspect of this arithmetic. Perhaps some of you are getting a little bit nervous, and this is a cause for pause here, because we are declaring that we have some object so that when we multiply it by zero, we do not get zero anymore.

Usually, that's always what happens: when you multiply by zero, you get zero. But here, in this world, it appears that zero times anti-zero is not zero; it's rather anti-zero. We can do the same  thing, replacing the one with zero. Zero carrot zero equals zero. That gives us this equation. We do the multiplications: zero times zero, zero times zero-a, zero-a, zero-a, zero to the a, zero to the a.

Zero times anti-zero, we've just established, is anti-zero. This one's also anti-zero. We've just established that these two here can be determined because now, again, these cancel. We just get anti-zero, and this anti-zero times anti-zero. Since we want that to be the empty mset, we must have that this combination is actually the thing that cancels anti-zero, which is zero. We get anti-zero times anti-zero equals zero.

We have two things multiplying together, basically squaring to get zero, but the actual object itself is not zero. It's another  unpredictable thing, counter to our usual intuition. Great. Now we can write down addition and multiplication tables for zero, the zero level of our arithmetic, which now contains not just zero but also anti-zero. At that zeroth level, there are now two objects. There's an addition table: zero plus zero is zero, zero plus anti-zero is anti-zero, anti-zero plus zero is anti-zero, and anti-zero plus anti-zero is zero.

And there is a multiplication table: zero times zero is zero, zero times anti-zero is anti-zero, anti-zero times zero is anti-zero, and anti-zero times anti-zero is zero. Notably, these tables are pretty well the same except for the operation sign. They're exactly the same. At the level of zero, the operations of addition and multiplication cannot be distinguished. Here's another exercise if you like this  thing. Show that for any mset or object M which is not equal to anti-zero, we have M times anti-zero, the same as anti-zero times M, is anti-zero.

This is quite interesting because of this requirement here that we have to restrict ourselves. It's not true; this is not true if M is equal to anti-zero itself because if M is equal to anti-zero, anti-zero times anti-zero, that's equal to zero, not anti-zero. That's already suggesting that that's quite an interesting  thing. We have to be mindful of this  exemption to this general rule. There's something interesting happening here, and it motivates us to really investigate further the internal consistency of this arithmetic. Is this arithmetic really consistent or not?

Having spent quite a lot of time on these anti-zeros and their various properties, now let's move to negative numbers. That's a different kettle of fish because we are still using the anti property but  putting it one level down in an mset. Specifically, what we're going to do now is introduce minus one, or preferably one bar, defined as the mset consisting of anti-zero. Let me remind you that one is the mset consisting of zero. Now minus one is the mset consisting of anti-zero. If we add the two of them, well then, obviously, we get an mset consisting of an anti-zero and a zero.

They annihilate, and we just get the empty set. Yes, indeed, one bar plus one, or one plus one bar in the other way around, is indeed zero. This fundamental property that we require for a minus one, or one bar, is satisfied. Let's look at one bar times one. There's one bar, there's one. We're multiplying, so we have to take all possible sums of elements.

We have an mset with anti-zero plus zero. We know that sum is anti-zero, and so we see that minus one times one is minus one. Similarly, one times minus one is one. In the same spirit, minus one times minus one. There's minus one, there's minus one. We multiply them, we get anti-zero plus anti-zero inside.

We know that particular combination is zero, okay, we've already established that. We get that one bar times one bar equals one. Now that we have minus one, or one bar, we can introduce integers or negative numbers. First, definition: if N is a natural number, then N-bar, otherwise known as minus N, is going to be defined by one bar times N. For example, 2-bar by definition is one bar times two. There's one bar, the mset consisting of anti-zero.

Here's two, the mset consisting of zero zero. We multiply them, so we have to form anti-zero plus zero, anti-zero plus zero. Each of those is anti-zero, so we get anti-zero, anti-zero. That's what 2-bar is as an mset. It's the mset consisting of two anti-zeros in a parallel way to the fact that two is the mset consisting of two zeros. Let's do some arithmetic with integers, say two plus three bar.

There's two, there's three bar, or negative three. Adding the msets, we just dump them all together, so we get a zero, a zero, anti-zero, anti-zero, anti-zero. We get some cancellation because they're in the same mset, so they can interact with each other. This zero, that anti-zero, perhaps they annihilate. This zero, that anti-zero, perhaps they annihilate. We end up with a single anti-zero in the mset, so that's one bar, or minus one.

Two times three bar, well, there's two times three bar. We're taking the product, so we have to form all possible pairs and form their sums. Zero plus anti-zero, well, that's anti-zero. All of these are anti-zero. We get six anti-zeros, which is six bar, or minus six. You can  see that the usual arithmetical laws for integers are going to be satisfied here.

In particular, why minus two times minus three is six is going to be self-evident simply because anti-zero plus anti-zero is zero. In our final slide, I want to show you that this notion of negation actually now extends much further. Usually in algebra, when we introduce negative things, we have to  do it separately at various levels. When we introduce polynomials, we have to define how we're going to define negative multiplications, etc. Here, essentially, the same point of view that we already have allows us to extend this negativity all the way down. Again, we have to draw heavily upon this prior understanding of anti-msets.

Suppose M is an arbitrary pure mset, so it's an mset just consisting of things that we already are working with, no other kinds of mathematical objects. We're going to define M-bar, or minus M if you like, just to be one bar times M. Now we can deduce that if M is a pure mset, then what this really is doing is taking the anti of each of the elements of M. M is a box that has a lot of little boxes inside. These are the elements. Those boxes themselves may very well have all kinds of stuff inside each one of them.

That's fine. But the negative of the entire big box is, according to this, what you get when you consider the box consisting of the antis of each of the elements: the anti of this little element, the anti of this element, the anti of this little element, and so on. That's what the negative of the entire mset is. Why is that? Well, M-bar, according to the definition, is one bar times M. One bar, there it is, the mset consisting of anti-zero.

M is the mset consisting of, let's say, little M's where M is an m. We have a whole bunch of these elements of M. How do we multiply things? We have to take all possible pairs between these guys and these guys, and we have to add them. Well, there's only one of them here, so we're just taking all pairs of the form O-A and M, and we're adding them. We're getting O-A plus M as we run little M through capital M.

But O-A plus M, if M is any mset, is the anti of M. Remember, that was one of the rules we established, that you add anti-zero to anything, you're getting the anti of that thing. Each of the elements of m is being anti-ed by the effect of multiplying by minus one. That's another way of thinking about what negation is in this world. It's unfamiliar; it's something that we need to get our heads around. In my next video, I'm going to try to give you some more illustrations of how this works.

There's much more to be said here. This has all kinds of very interesting consequences, and there's still exploration to be made in terms of whether this actually rings true and is a consistent theory, which we do not yet know. This is a prospective arithmetic. There is much to investigate and think about here. I'm Norman Wildberger Thanks for listening. [Music]