# The operation of caret ⧸ exponentiation (new!) via multisets ｜ Math Foundations 229 ｜ N J Wildberger

Hi everyone, I'm Norman Wildberger. Welcome to this lecture on a new way of thinking about arithmetic by using the idea of a multi-set, this foundational data structure concept to build up the entire theory, including algebra, in a systematic or step-by-step fashion, from really the most essential simple  object perhaps that we can imagine, which is an empty set or an empty multi-set. What we're doing here is trying to expand our point of view from the set-theoretical orientation that 20th-century mathematics largely had, which was, of course, built up from the need of analysts to have a foundation for their understanding of analysis on the continuum. Dedekind's theory of real numbers required cantor's theory of infinite sets, and so the need for infinite sets became important. And then this 20th-century axiomatic approach to set theory was the  philosophical substitute for a proper foundation. And since then, more and more mathematicians have leaned on sets as  foundational objects in mathematics and have tried to frame everything, or largely everything, in terms of sets.

Now, sets are well and good, but they're really only one of several possible data structures that are available to us, and in particular, multi-sets are a very important alternative, and they allow us to see a lot of different things in a very different light. Today, we're going to see a really good example of that because we're going to move towards exponentiation. This is the third of our operations in this world of multi-sets, and it's quite different from the exponentiation that you're familiar with, so be prepared for some serious novelty, and we're going to have to go slowly and carefully. I'm going to exhibit lots of examples so you can see how this actually works, and at the end of the video, you'll see that there are actually some really remarkable properties that this thing has, so it really is deserving of our study and our attention. The basic framework is that we've set up this idea of inductive or recursive building up of ever more complicated objects, starting with zero, which is just the empty mset, and then msets of zero are called natural numbers. Msets of natural numbers are called poly numbers.

Msets of poly numbers are called multi numbers, and of course, we could carry on like this. Today, what we're going to do is we're going to introduce some parallel things: first of all, some counting functions that allow us to roughly assign sizes to some of these multi-sets that we're looking at. We're going to introduce z, n, p, and m, obviously paralleling these different types. And so these are going to be counting functions, with N being the one that's most familiar, counting the number of objects in a set or a collection. And then we're going to look at this hierarchy of operations that is potentially available to us, starting with addition and then multiplication, and moving crucially today to exponentiation. And throughout, I want you to have this idea that we're looking in this direction, and we can  see that the steps that we're taking can be extended in a very obvious and natural way, right?

At all of these points, i want you to be thinking, "i wonder what happens if we go one step further or two steps further or something like this?" things get richer, they get more complicated, we get a bigger picture. There's a lot of thinking to be done and try to move in this direction in this interesting, somewhat new world of mathematics. Now, before I go on, it's the beginning of New Year 2023, so happy New Year to everyone, and a special thanks to my Patreon supporters and to members of my Wild Egg Mathematics Courses YouTube channel. You guys are great. Thanks so much for your support. It's really appreciated.

All right, so this video will be very much building on Math Foundations 227 and 228, the two previous ones, so please make sure you watch them. But a very quick review: so we have these different types. Zero is just the empty mset, denoted with brackets like this or with the symbol zero. That's what zero is in our world. Natural numbers are msets of zeros. For example, that's an mset of zeros, and the simplest one is an mset just consisting of zero.

That's going to be called one. This one here is called four. This is where the usual primary school natural number arithmetic takes place. Then, one step up, msets of natural numbers are called poly numbers. The simplest one is Alpha zero, which is not already a natural number, and zero is Alpha zero, which is the mset consisting of one. Here's a typical poly number, which can then be interpreted as in the form two plus Alpha zero plus Alpha zero cubed.

Then to the next stage, multi numbers are msets of poly numbers. So, for example, this thing here, that's a polynomial, that's a polynomial, that's a polynomial. So, that's an mset of poly numbers. And then, when we introduce this new notation, Alpha one for the mset containing Alpha zero, Alpha two for the mset containing Alpha zero squared, Alpha three containing Alpha zero cubed, then we can write something like this as a multinomial if you like, involving several variables. In this case, Alpha zero, Alpha one, Alpha two, Alpha four, and in principle, we could have more and more variables. Then, addition is the  fundamental object.

If you have an mset here, another mset here, the way you add them is you just dump the contents out into another box. So, this mc01, this number three, this mc2 get moved in the other box, and the two elements here, one and four, get moved in the box. Multiplication is a little bit more sophisticated. The way you multiply two msets is that you add the elements of this mset with the elements of this set in all possible ways and form a multi-set of all those possible sums. So, this one here has two elements, multi-set 06 and number one. This one also, two elements, number four and multi-set two.

When we multiply them, we have to take the sum of this and this, which is this mset, sum of this and this, which is this one, sum of this and this, which is this, and some of this and this, which is this. Make sure that you understand those examples. So, that's a very quick overview, and now we want to go further. So, we've informally used the word "element of an mset." Let me be a little bit more careful about that and also introduce some important notation. So, here's an example of an mset consisting of zero, zero, one, and another mset containing two and three. So, we'll say that the elements of this mset are zero, zero, one, two, three.

So, this is a big box and inside it has other boxes, and those other boxes very well may have other stuff inside them, okay? But the boxes that you can see are the elements of the bigger box, including their contents. So, we then write, to denote this element relation, zero is an element of A, one is an element of A, and this multi-set two, three is an element of A. So, these are all separate true statements. And if X is a general mset, then we're going to introduce this  notation to allow us to describe the elements. So, the brackets mean mset, okay, and here is  the object that we're considering or the objects that we're considering, and the colon here represents some condition, and the condition is that little X belongs to capital X.

In other words, there's an element of capital X in this set here. So, what we're saying here, this is the way of thinking about X. It's the multi-set consisting of all X where X is an element of X. So, in this case, we would have to run through all of these: zero, zero, one, and two, three, as we are running through the elements of X. In other words, we have to respect the natural multiplicities that are occurring here throughout. Okay, so it's very different from set theory in that way.

There's two zeros here, we have to keep those two zeros separate, we have to keep track of them, there's two of them there. Let me illustrate the usefulness of this notation by starting again with this mset A, and here are some other msets defined in terms of the elements of A. So, B is the mset of things in the form A plus one, where A is in capital A. So, we have to take each one of these elements, and we have to add one to them. So, zero plus one is one, zero plus one is one, one plus one is two, and if we add one to this, well, remember, one is the mset consisting of zero. So, when we add those two msets, we get the mset zero, two, three.

Here's mset C, which is the set of two times A where A is an element of A. So, we have to multiply each of these things by two. Okay, so two times zero is zero, two times zero is zero, two times one is two, two times this thing is this mset right here. Here is a more complicated thing where we're taking two M sets, say this A and this B, and we're actually taking their product, AB, or we could possibly, more precisely, say A times B. All right, we will sometimes use this, but actually this is probably preferred, okay? And so, what is the definition of that?

Well, in terms of this notation, it's the set of A plus B such that A belongs to capital A and B belongs to capital B. So, what we have to do is we have to go through these two sets here and take sums of things. So, the zero and the one is one, the zero and the one is one, the zero and the two is two, and the zero and plus this is itself. And then when we repeat it with this one, we get the same thing. And then when we add one, we're going to get two, two, three. And this thing, when we add two, three to everything, we get two, three plus one is this one, two, three plus one is this one, two, three plus two is this one here, because two is the mset consisting of two zeros.

And finally, when we add this one and this one, we get this one here. Okay, so it's a convenient  notation for us all right. Now let's introduce these counting functions which tell us how big msets are, and there's different levels of counting functions,  more sophisticated ones as we go on. So, we're working always with pure msets, I remind you. That's the framework where we start with the empty msets and we only create msets by using empty msets and containments of boxes and boxes. Okay, so there are no other external mathematical objects at this stage, we just have empty boxes and we put those empty boxes inside other boxes to form  nested collections of boxes, so there's nothing else.

Okay, so the first function, very simple, is that if A is a pure mset, we define Z of A to be zero, the empty mset. So, every mset when you apply the Zed counting function to it, you always get zero. It's pretty simple. N. So, N is defined this way: if A is a pure set, then capital N of A is the mset consisting of things that form as Z of A as A runs through A. So, for each element of capital A, we take Z of that.

In other words, we're essentially replacing it with zero. So, we're looking inside A, oh there's all these boxes, we're replacing each of those boxes and all their contents with a single zero, single zero, single zero, single zero. The result then is naturally a natural number because we're getting an mset of zeros. So, for example, if A is this same set here, then Z of A, of course, is zero, and N of A, well, we have to apply Z to each of the elements. So, is that a zero? Z is zero, Z of one, and Z of the mset two, three.

Well, each of these is zero, so we get zero, zero, zero, zero, and we recognize that's the natural number four. So, this is how we are counting in  the naive, basic fashion. The N function is doing that, it's basically replacing elements with zeros. It might be worthwhile to point out that this is in some sense like almost a prehistoric  simple  thing. It's analogous to some kids 100,000 years ago seeing some animals at a waterhole, and they want to convey how many animals there are, and so they're going to go, there's an animal, there's an animal, there's an animal, there's an animal, there's that many animals. So, they walk home, they say, oh look, that's how many animals there are at the waterhole.

So, you don't really need a prior language of numbers; you just need some physical representation, some simpler representation of the complicated set out there. what we're doing here, the fingers are being represented just by these zeros. These zeros here are just representing these more complicated objects. Now, let's go to one level higher and define the P counting function. So, P of an mset A is the mset of N of A where A is in capital A. So, each of the elements of A, we apply N to it, getting therefore a natural number, and then we put all those natural numbers in an mset.

So, obviously, what we're getting here is a poly number, necessarily by definition. So, what we're doing now is we're assigning a more sophisticated  object to this thing that we're counting that might be roughly analogous to a more sophisticated child who goes and sees the five animals at the water hole and says, "Aha! But they're actually three antelope." Well, it doesn't say three, he says, "There are this many antelope, antelope, antelope, antelope," and "There are this many lions, lion, lion." Okay, and he walks home like this and says, "Look, this is what's at the water hole: antelopes, lions." Okay, that's more information, that's more detailed information than just saying that there's this many animals. That's  what we're doing. And then, next level, the multiset analog M of A is the mset of P of little A's where A is in capital A. Okay, let's do an example.

So, here is an mset B. So, there's an mset, there's an mset, there's an mset. Okay, so Z of B, well, Z of B is always zero. N of B, we have to replace the elements with zero. So, this element is replaced with zero, this element is replaced with zero, this element is replaced with zero. Again, zero, zero, zero, which is the number three.

So, N of B is three. What is P of B? Well, we have to take N of this, we have to take N of this, we have to take N of this, and we have to form an mset of those, alright? So, what is N of this? Well, that means we have to count what's inside here. So, what does that mean?

It means that we have to look inside this absent and apply Z to each of the elements. So, we have to apply Z to 2 and we have to apply Z to 4. We're going to get 0, 0. So, N of this thing is the mset 0, 0, which is the number two. Here, when you get the mset 0, 0, 0, which is the number three, here, we're going to get the mset 0, 0, which is the number two. So, this thing, it's a poly number, it's an mset of natural numbers, is the P of B, this mset B.

It's a  more refined information, right? The N of B is telling you, "Okay, this thing has three things in it," that's what that's telling you. This thing here is telling you more. You can still see that there's three things in it, but you can tell more about what those three things are, but still not enough information to recover them. What about M of B? Well, so now what we have to do is we have to take the elements of B and we have to apply P to each one of them.

So, we have to take P of this thing, we have to take P of this mset, we have to take P of this mset, and form an mset of them. Okay, so what is P of this one here? How do we do that? P of this is going to be N of each one of these. Okay, what's N of 2? That's a good question.

What is N of two? So, what is 2? Well, 2 is the mset consisting of 0, 0. So, if you replace each one of those zeros with zero, you're going to get the same mset, you're going to get two back again. So, N of two is two. In fact, N of any natural number is itself.

Okay, so that's what N of two is. What is N of this thing? Well, this mset only has one thing in it, so its size is one. Okay, so P of this thing is the mset two, one. P of this thing is going to be zero, one, one, the same thing as itself because these guys are all natural numbers and an N of them are each themselves. What is P of this?

Well, we have to apply N to each of these. So, what's N of this? Well, it's one. What's N of this? It's one. And so, P of this thing is mset one, one.

And M of the entire thing is this thing here. So, again, this is like a little bit more detailed information than P of B, right? This is telling you more. It's still  like this. , you can see that there's two things here, and there's three things here, and there's two things here. Usually, you can recover that, but it's telling you a little bit more about the structure, but still not enough information to actually recover the B.

Of course, if we went one step further, then maybe things would be different. You might like to think about that. Okay, so we have a natural hierarchy of counting functions now that allows us to, , talk about the sizes of msets in some fashion but in a rather flexible fashion. We can talk about sizes at different levels. Now, we want to talk about operations because we want to move towards the exponentiation operation. So, addition, we've already talked about.

If A and B are msets, here's the definition, here is a possible definition of what their sum is. So, A plus B, it's the mset of A's and B's where A is in A and B is in B. So, we just form this mset. For each element of A, we've put it in there; for each element of the B, we have to put it in there. We just form a big mset. Maybe this is a  a strange notation, but I think it's at least somewhat indicative of what we're doing.

But of course, we know what that is, right? We're just taking the two boxes and dumping them out into another box, and that's the addition. Here's an example: there's an mset, there's an mset, here's the sum in the obvious fashion. Multiplication. Now, we can also express that, as we've already seen, in terms of our notation. Okay, so A times B is the set or the mset of A plus B such that little A is in capital A and little B is in capital B.

So, we have to go through all possible pairings of elements in A and elements in B, and we have to add them. Okay, that mset that we get is the product of the msets. Here's an example: there's an mset, has one element there, one element there, one element there, one element there. Okay, so they should be able together, four elements in their product. There's one element, I guess there's another, there's another, there's another. So, you can check that I've done it correct.

Alright, so here's the definition of the exponentiation operation, and I warn you again, okay, that you're going to have to maybe make a separate compartment in your mind for this because this is not exactly the same as the exponentiation that you're familiar with, although we're still going to use the same notation, the  familiar wedge. Okay, so we have two msets A and B, and we define A wedge B, the exponentiation of A and B, and it's the obvious thing. Okay, it is the mset consisting of all A times B's where A belongs to capital A and little B belongs to capital B. So, we look at all possible pairs of elements in A and elements in B, and this time we multiply them. To define multiplication, we added them. To define exponentiation, we're going to multiply them.

See, in some sense, this is like, , so blindingly obvious, isn't it? , it's like what else could you do, what else could you do? Okay, so what actually happens? So, here's an example: let's say this thing is A, there's an mset, here's another mset, let's call it B. We want to exponentiate them; let's instead of multiplying them, we're going to exponentiate them. Okay, so what do we have to do?

Well, we have to take pairs of elements. So, this element, mset one, two, we're going to have to multiply it by zero; we're also going to have to multiply it by this mset. We're going to take this element and this element and multiply them; we have to take this and this and multiply them. Okay, what did we get? So, anything times zero is zero, that's easy to check. To multiply these two msets, we have to, again, form all possible pairs, and this time, add them.

One plus zero is one, one plus three is four, two plus zero is two, and two plus three is five. So, we're going to get the mset one, four, two, five. Four times zero is zero, four times this, well, you can work it out, you're just going to get these things here repeated four times, so you're going to get zero, zero, zero, zero, three, three, three. Okay, so those are the various possible products, and there are four of them, and the mset formed by them is the wedge of A and B, or the exponentiation of A and B. Let's note in this case here that with respect to the counting functions, okay? So, if we looked at Z of A and Z of B and took their wedge, well, the Z of anything is zero, so zero wedge zero is zero.

And please convince yourself that that's zero; that certainly is that of A wedge B. So, trivially, this exponentiation satisfies compatibility with Z. What about compatibility with N? So, what's N of A? This thing here has two elements, and N of B, this thing here has also two elements. So, two wedge two, okay?

What is two wedge two? So, this is the mset 0 0, and this one's the mset 0 0. So, we have to form all possible pairs and multiply them, but zero times zero is zero, so we're going to get four zeros, so we're gonna get 0 0 0 0, which is four. In other words, we're getting the same as the product, so actually when it comes to numbers, exponentiation of numbers is the same as multiplication of numbers. Okay, maybe you object to that, but just bear with me, okay? That's the way it is.

Alright, so that's four. And what about N of A wedge B? Well, here's A wedge B, and it has one, two, three, four elements. So, yes indeed, N of A wedge B is equal to N of A wedge B. What about P of A wedge, P of B? We can practice our counting.

So, what's P of this thing here? Well, we have to count how many N of this and N of this, and this is two, and this is four, and this—what's N of zero? It's zero. What's N of this? It's two; there are two things in here. Now, when we exponentiate these two msets, we have to form all possible products, so two times zero is zero, two times two is four, four times zero is zero, four times two is eight, so we're getting the mset 0 4 0 8.

And what about A wedge B here? It is here. What is P of that? N of this is zero, and this is zero. N of this is four, and this is eight. So, in this case at least, we see that P of A wedge, P of B is equal to P of A wedge B.

What about M of A wedge, M of B? Well, these guys are all multinumbers, both of them, because they're msets of polynumbers. And it's not too hard to see that if you have a multinumber and you apply M to it, you're going to get itself. So, M of A equals A, and M of B equals B. And if you take A wedge B, which is this thing here, that's also a multinumber, so M of it is also A wedge B. So, yes indeed, this also is satisfied for M.

So, we have a  compatibility between exponentiation and the operation Z, P, and M, at least in this case. So, you might like to think about whether this is just a happy accident or whether it happens more generally. So, I want to look at a slightly more complicated example where one of the msets, at least, is below a multinumber. Okay, so this one here, A, is an mset consisting of two msets, and this mset here consists of a number and another mset. So, we have a , , three levels of nesting before we get to the numbers. So, this is not a multinumber; this is a multinumber over here because these guys are both polynumbers.

But these guys here are not polynumbers; this one here itself is a multinumber, so it's one step further. So, let's have a look at what A wedge B is in this case. So, still, we have to take products. So, we have to take this element times two and this element times mset one three. We have to take this three times two and this three times one three. Okay, what happens when we do this?

When we multiply, apply anything by two, basically we're just  doubling all the entries. We're going to get 1 1 m. Two m z two. When we do this product here, we have to form all possible combinations and form sums. One plus one is two, one plus three is four. This mset, two plus one is mset 2 0, and mset two plus three is mset 2000, because remember 3 is just mset zero zero zero.

Okay, this mset three times two is mset three three, and this one here with the addition then we get to 4 6. There's the exponentiation of a and b. Now I'm just making a little check here so you can see if I've done it right. I claim that N of A, well clearly Z of A, where instead of B, and Z of A wedge B, that's happening all the time, but here N of A is 2. And N of B is 2, and their wedge, as we've seen, is four, and that is indeed the number of elements in A wedge B. And P of A wedge, P of B, well, there's my calculation, and you can convince yourself that's P of A wedge B.

And I've also done M of A wedge, M of B. Now, what does M of this thing here? M of this thing is we have to apply p to each of the elements here. Okay, so this is P of this. How do we apply it? What do we do there to form P of that?

Well, we have to take N of each one of these. N of 1 is 1, and n of this thing is one. And similarly, what is P of this thing? Well, P of this thing is N of what's inside. N of 3 is 3. We're getting the mset 3.

And this thing is a multinumber, so M of it is itself. And then, the multiplication, and we can convince ourselves that we're getting M of A wedge B again. It seems we've got a little bit more evidence that this exponentiation operation is behaving nicely with respect to these basic counting functions. Here are some other additional properties of the exponentiation operation that are worthwhile, , just being explicit about. And it's important to note the difference between this one and the usual exponentiation operation. And let me remind you that this is happening much more broadly, right?

We're exponentiating multinumbers by multinumbers, and we're in principle, we're exponentiating, , huge towers of nested msets with huge towers of nested msets. Okay, it's all completely done in a recursive fashion. It's actually making a computation like this is something that your computer is likely going to be very good at, but maybe for us, it's a little bit challenging. But hey, it's good to have mathematics which our computers can do really easily and well. Okay, so the basic properties: well, the thing is commutative. Okay, why is it commutative?

Well, it's because the exponentiation is defined in terms of the multiplication, and the multiplication is commutative. And ultimately, why is multiplication commutative? It's because it's defined in terms of addition, and addition is commutative. And similarly, this thing is associative. If you have three of them and you exponentiate them like this, that ultimately comes down to looking at expressions of the form little a times little b times little c, and we know that multiplication is associative. It doesn't matter how you bracket those things.

And the reason for that is because, well, it comes just directly down to addition, because addition is associative. And it's ultimately because when you bump contents of boxes into other boxes, the order is unimportant. This thing here has a well-defined meaning. We just, well, write a wedge b wedge c is a mset of things that form a times b times c, where little a is an a, little b is in b, and little c is in c. And then there's a distributive law. There are actually two of them.

Of course, the A plus B wedge C is A wedge C plus B wedge C. And let's just observe that the usual convention is that these higher operations have precedence. When we see something like this, we have to do these exponentiations before we do the addition. All right, so this means first do A wedge C, B wedge C, and then add them. And then there's some  identity-type properties. Zero wedge anything is zero, it's easy to see.

And like a  a counting thing, that if you wedge something with one, you're going to get N of A. A is some m set, and you're wedging it with one, you're taking the exponentiation with one. One is mset zero. What you have to do is you have to multiply zero by each one of the elements of a, zero times this element, zero times this element, etc. What you end up doing is you're just replacing all the elements with zero, and the mset that you're getting then is just n of a. It's just you just kept essentially counting the number of elements in A.

That's an important  way of thinking about the exponentiation, right? It's performing an important function that exponentiating with one is just basically counting, counting at the end level. And then if we go up one, right, so we go to poly numbers, this thing here, mset one, which is Alpha zero or Alpha Sub Zero, that is going to have the property that's going to be playing the role of the identity. If we wedge that with any A in either order, we're going to get A. Why is that? Well, because, , here's an M set A, it has various elements, and we're wedging it with mset one.

What does that mean we have to do? Well, we have to perform all possible pairs between this one and these other guys, and we have to multiply them. We have to do one times this one times this one times this, etc. Well, the one is acting as the identity in the multiplication level. Okay, , and so this mset one is going to act as the identity at the exponentiation level. See?

And it's  beautiful. You can   see that these patterns are just going to keep on extending, right? This is big arithmetic. Okay, so we are going to talk more about exponentiation because in fact it has a very important consequence in terms of rethinking our framework for multinumbers. But what I want to do before that is connect directly with computer science. Probably a lot of you will have figured this out already by now: that this discussion of m sets nested in each other is really very close to a discussion of trees, which we  refer to as rooted trees in computer science.

And so I want to talk about that, and I want to show you that in fact, in some sense, this arithmetic has probably been under the noses of the computer scientists for a long time. In fact, I wouldn't at all be surprised if some computer scientist somewhere or other had already developed this  thing. In fact, it would be a little bit of a surprise if that wasn't the case, to be honest. But in any case, I think it'll be quite interesting because it'll give us another  way of visualizing what this arithmetic looks like. Hope you'll join me for that. I'm Norman Wildberger.

Thanks for listening and happy New Year!