# The big step from polynumbers to multinumbers!! ｜ Math Foundations 228 ｜ N J Wildberger

[Music] Good day everyone. I'm Norman Walberger, and we're investigating a new approach to arithmetic based on multi-sets—data structures which are unordered and allow repetition. Today, we're going to take the big step from poly numbers to multi numbers. Let me quickly review what we did in our previous video. We introduced zero as the multi-set, or more shortly, mset, which is empty and has nothing in it. We introduced the type of natural number.

The natural number is an mset of zeros. There's a natural number that's actually probably the simplest natural number which is not zero itself, and it's called one. This natural number has two zeros in it. It's got the usual name of two. This is three, etc. This is the usual natural number story.

A poly number is an mset of natural numbers, and the simplest one is this one, alpha, which is just the mset containing one. Here is a more general poly number: 0, 0, 0, 1, 3, 4, 4. These are all natural numbers. This is an mset of natural numbers, so therefore it's a poly number. And then we also introduced multi numbers. A multi number is an mset of poly numbers.

The simplest one there would be the mset consisting just of alpha, and we haven't yet given it a name. That's going to be interesting for us today—to investigate how we should get some terminology going for these multi numbers. Here's a more general  multi-number. It's an mset consisting of—there's a poly number, there's another poly number, there's another poly number, and there's another poly number. It's an mset of poly numbers. Repetitions are allowed and it's unordered.

There's no commas, and so this is a multi-number. Today, we want to really talk about the big step going from here to here. It might be useful to introduce this designation of a pure mset to denote one of these structures that is obtained by starting with empty msets and just putting them in other msets, so just nesting empty msets inside other msets, etc. This is contained in this  ongoing sequence. Here we started with zero, which is a type, and then we had Nat, which includes zero, and then poly, and multi, and clearly we could keep on going in a  a step-by-step fashion. I want to introduce this idea because it's certainly possible that later on we might be interested in msets of other things—other kinds of objects, not just empty msets and things formed from them.

Alright, so the advantage of making this specific is that this way, the operations that we're going to talk about later are all  consistently defined on these things because an mset, in this context of pure mset, is already an mset of msets, and it's already an mset of msets of msets, etc. I also might want to point out that we should not think about these things as objects. It's not as if we have an object of all multi-sets, okay? We want to avoid that  modern set theory approach where we think that we've got all the multi-sets contained in here. No, no. What we're doing is we're rather identifying a type, okay?

You should think about it as being something like instructions for a computer. The computer gets some input, and the computer is able to read that input and then decide whether the object is of this type or some other type, okay? That's what we're talking about. These are not objects, and I want to just emphasize that there's this basic principle that runs through a lot of my exposition, which is that we want write-downable mathematics. We want to separate or distance ourselves from the 20th-century abstractions which have allowed people to think about things which they are not actually able to write down. We don't want to be doing that, okay?

We want to insist that all the pure msets that we're talking about are completely unambiguously write-downable. You could actually exhibit them in their entirety, not with any requirements of alternate universes or who knows what, beyond our vision. In particular, have a look at these. These are examples of things which, from our point of view at least at this stage, are not allowable. We are not allowed to say, "Oh, consider this pure mset. What is this?

Oh, it's what you get when you start with an empty mset like a box, and then you put that inside a bigger box, and you put that inside a bigger box, and you put that inside a bigger box, and you keep going without stopping. Keep going. Everything is contained in a bigger box to infinity, whatever that means." Okay, that's the  thing that 20th-century mathematicians were not reluctant to talk about. If you actually look at the foundations of analysis or differential geometry or algebraic geometry or topology, it's essentially this  talking which is at the core of much of these subjects. Okay, we do not want to go there, okay? For us, this  object where you have to do an infinite number of things is not going to be allowed.

Similarly, if going the other way, we can start with a box, and inside it put another box, and inside that you put another box, inside that you put another box, and then you keep going again to infinity. Okay, we're not allowed to use that language, okay? Because we can't write the thing down completely. This is obviously not an adequate representation just like this isn't. These are not the kinds of things that we want to do. But I want to keep open the possibility that there's an idea contained here, right?

There is some  idea, and it's possible for us to perhaps access that idea in a completely write-downable, finite, concrete fashion. But we would have to do that in a different way from doing something like this with three dots, okay? I'm not saying that this object will never or these objects will never be part of our world. I'm just saying that when we do eventually want to try to think about something like this, we're going to have to think about them in different ways that allow us still to write them down completely finitely and write-downably, okay? And it's also useful to point out that later on, we may want to depart from our pure mset point of view and consider other kinds of data structures like in the LOM system: lists, order sets, multi-sets, and sets. Right now, we're just focusing on multi-sets, but it will become useful potentially for us to consider other such structures, okay?

In that case, we might depart from this very pure mset point of view. Our two basic operations are addition and multiplication, and let's review them here. I hope you've watched Math Foundations 227, the previous video, where we introduced this approach and it's fresh in your mind. Addition is the simplest possible thing. We just take msets and we dump the contents out into another box. That's addition of msets.

Very simple. For example, here's an mset, here's an mset, here's an mset. This mset here has some poly numbers in them. These are poly numbers, and this one here has some poly numbers and also a number, but they're all msets of poly numbers, so these are all multi numbers. And we just get the sum by dumping them out. The 3, the 3, the 1, 2, the 0, the 0, the 1, the 3, the 4.

Multiplication is one step up, a little bit more sophisticated in that it relies on the prior definition of addition. But we're going to be adding elements of the various things to be multiplied in all possible ways. To multiply these three msets, we take one element from this one, one element from this one, and one element from this one, and we add them. And because addition doesn't depend on the order in which we do things, so also multiplication is not going to depend on the order, so we don't need to worry about bracketing. In other words, a big simplification. Okay, so what do we actually get here?

We've got, this mset has mset 2 and 3. It has mset 4, mset 4 in it. This one has mset 1, 6, and a 0. We're multiplying them. We have to take elements from each one. Let's take this mset 2, this mset 4, this mset 1, 6, and we're going to add them.

This one, mset 2, mset 4, and the 0, and we'll add them. Then mset 2 and then this mset 4 and this mset 1, 6, add them. This mset 2, this mset 4, and then 0 and add them. And then the same  thing, but now we take this number 3, the number 3 plus the mset 4 plus the mset 1, 6, and add them. The mset 3, this mset 4, the 0, and add them. This mset 3, this mset 4, this mset 1, 6, and add them.

This mset 3, this mset 4, and this 0, and we add them. Okay, when we actually do that, okay, the sum of these things, just dump them out, we get a 2, a 4, a 1, and a 6. Here we get a 2, a 4. We add 0. Zero, remember, is the empty mset. Adding that doesn't do anything, so you just get 2, 4.

This one here, you get 2, 4, 1, 6. The same thing as over here. Here, the natural number 3 as an mset is 0, 0, 0. It consists of three zeros. Okay, so when we look at it that way, then adding them comes up with 0, 0, 0, 4, 1, 6. Here, the sum is 0, 0, 0, 4, and this adding zero doesn't do anything, and you're just adding an empty mset.

And here we get the same thing as here, and here we get the same thing as here. This is how we calculate the product of msets. One of the interesting aspects of this approach to arithmetic is that it seems that no matter how far you go, it's just part of some bigger picture. Okay, so that means that we never have this feeling of a complete understanding. We feel that our understanding is always just temporary and waiting for the next level, the next step, the bigger picture of which this is just some part. We have to be a little bit modest, but it also means that we need to be flexible about the terminology and our notation and our thinking because it might be possible that with a few steps up, we start to see what we've just previously been doing in a new light, and we have to maybe improve our notation to make it fit with this bigger picture.

That's going to happen right here as we try to move from poly to multi. We've introduced this notation, alpha, which corresponds with my usual terminology for poly numbers. This alpha is  your basic variable. Alpha was just a name for the multi-set consisting of a single one. I want to change the name of that now, okay? And this is, , seemingly unmotivated until we go to the multi point of view and then you see, ah, there's actually a very good reason for doing this.

Okay, so we're going to change the name from alpha to alpha 0 or alpha sub 0. Okay, so we're going to make that change. Now the name of this mset, the mset consisting just of one, is now going to be alpha 0, alpha sub 0. Okay, so let me remind you, there's some basic facts about this thing. If you take two alpha 0, in other words, alpha 0 plus alpha 0, that's mset 1 plus mset 1. Dump them together, you get mset 1, 1.

Similarly, three alpha 0 will be mset 1, 1, 1. If we multiply this thing by itself, alpha 0 squared, we have mset 1 times mset 1. We perform that by adding the ingredients 1 plus 1 in there, so we get mset 2. And similarly, alpha 0 cubed is mset 3 and so on. Now when we have a general poly number like this thing here, mset 0, 0, 0, 1, 3, 4, 4, we can write that as a more usual polynomial in alpha 0 here. Okay, by first of all  decomposing this into its various types.

0, 0, 0 is 1 mset, mset 1, mset 3, mset 4, 4, and then we recognize this thing here is just the number 3. This is what we're calling alpha 0. This thing here, this single 3, that was alpha 0 cubed. A single 4 would be alpha 0 to the fourth, and there's two of them here. In the same way here, we get 2 alpha 0 to the fourth. Okay, so this works better now because when we go to multi, what we want to do is introduce a new object, which is the previous object, namely alpha 0, put into an mset.

Okay, so we're going to take the mset now consisting of alpha 0, and we're going to give that a new name. That's going to be alpha sub 1. Okay, so alpha sub 1 is alpha sub 0 in an mset. And I have to emphasize the important distinction throughout this story of having an object and then having that object in an mset. Okay, those are two different things, and sometimes they're quite different things. Okay, so you have to keep that separation in mind.

Alpha 0 is this thing. Alpha 1 is the alpha 0 in the mset. And actually, , if we wrote it out just in terms of brackets, it would look like this. Alpha 1 is the mset consisting of alpha 0. There's alpha 0, mset 1. And what is 1?

Well, 1 is actually mset 0. Okay, and what is 0 actually? Well, 0 is the empty mset. We could  parse this by seeing that this alpha 1 is really, , a pair of brackets containing a pair of brackets containing a pair of brackets containing a pair of brackets. Ultimately, it's just brackets. That's alpha sub 1.

That's now our basic multi number which is not itself a poly number. It's the starting point from going from the poly world to the multi-world. Okay, so let's do some basic arithmetic now with multi numbers using this new notation and we'll  see how it works. And it also suggests that there's something else that we need to introduce. Okay, so alpha sub 1, that's mset alpha 0. Okay, so two alpha sub 1, or I'll just say two alpha 1, is what you get when you take two of these guys and dump them together.

It's mset alpha 0, alpha 0, which in terms of numbers is mset, mset 1, mset 1. There's an alpha 0. There's another alpha 0. Three alpha 1 will be mset consisting of mset 1, mset 1, mset 1. That's an alpha 0, that's an alpha 0, that's an alpha 0. How about alpha 1 squared?

Okay, so we're squaring, multiplying this thing by itself. Well, the way you multiply msets is you form another mset whose entries are the possible sums of entries here and here. Well, there's only one entry here and one entry here, one element here, one element here, so there's only one possible sum that we're going to form: alpha 0 plus alpha 0. Alpha 0 is mset 1, so we have mset 1 plus mset 1, and that is mset 1, 1, right? We're just dumping these two ones out into a separate box, so we get another box with the two ones in it. Okay, so that's what alpha sub 1 squared looks like.

Similarly, alpha 1 cubed looks like this: it's an mset consisting of mset 1, 1, 1. Here is a poly number in alpha 1, okay? Say 3 plus alpha 1 plus 4 alpha 1 squared plus alpha 1 to the fifth. We wanted to write that out. The 3 is mset 0, 0, 0. The alpha 1, well, that's the same thing we've been talking about: mset, mset 1.

It's an mset containing just alpha 0, and alpha 1 squared, that was this thing here, and we have four of them, so we have four of them, and alpha 1 to the fifth, parallel to this, is going to be mset, mset 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1. Okay, we could write this out more elementary by making a big mset, okay, and then it's going to have 0, 0, 0. It's going to have this mset 1, and then it's going to have mset 1, 1, mset 1, 1, mset 1, 1, mset 1, 1, 1. Okay, and here we've written it out then  in a pretty reduced form. We could still make it more reduced by replacing the ones with mset 0, and then we can make it even more reduced by replacing the zeros with mset, so then there would just be brackets and nothing else. Okay, but this is a  a nice way of reducing it to natural numbers.

I think that works well for us human beings. I want to compare this now with the corresponding poly story. We're taking the same form but replacing alpha 1 with alpha 0: 3 plus alpha 0 plus 4 alpha 0 squared plus alpha 0 to the 5. This is in the world of poly, right? This is in the world of multi, this is in the world of poly. The 3 is still 0, 0, 0.

The alpha 0 now is just mset 1. The alpha 0 squared is mset 2. We have four of them. And the alpha sub 0 to the 5 is mset 5. If we although i put a bracket over here, there's no bracket. Sorry, nope, I could.

Okay, it's just this plus this plus this plus this. Now if we want to put all those together because it's a sum of stuff, then there's a bracket, and then we have three of these zeros. We have a 1, we have a 2, 2, 2, 2, and a 5. You see it's in the world of polys the natural numbers are occurring. In the world of polys the natural numbers are occurring. I've been in correspondence with powers of the alpha 0.

Over here in the multi-world when we're looking at alpha 1 and polynomials in alpha 1, we're always staying within a framework that just involves the number 1, okay? We're not getting twos and threes and so on. This is just in terms of number ones. That's telling us that there's some more here that we need to actually include. We have not got all of multi yet, okay? This is just  the first step of multi.

Okay, so let's get at these further multi numbers. We already have alpha 1, okay? There's alpha 1, two alpha 1 we know, three alpha 1. Now let's look at alpha 2. We're going to introduce alpha sub 2 to be the mset consisting of alpha 0 squared, okay? Alpha 1 was the mset of alpha 0.

Alpha 2 is alpha 0 squared, the mset containing that. Alpha 3 will be corresponding to the mset consisting of alpha 0 cubed. Now alpha 0 squared is mset 2, and alpha 0 cubed is mset 3, so alpha 2 looks like this, and alpha 3 looks like this. If we look at 2 alpha 2, well, we have to add two of these things. We get mset with two copies of mset 2, mset 2. Here's 3 alpha 2, two copies of alpha 3 will be mset, mset 3, mset 3, and so on.

Okay, so we're enlarging our world here. Let's do some arithmetic with these things just to get used to things. Alright, so just some basic linear arithmetic. Say alpha 1 plus 3 alpha 2 plus alpha 3. That mset plus three of those plus one of those, well, we dump everything in boxes. We get an mset with a single mset 1, an mset 2, mset 2, mset 2, because we have three of them, and an mset 3.

How about alpha 1 squared? Well, we've already done that. Okay, let me remind you that when we multiply alpha 1 by alpha 1, we're getting mset, mset 1, 1. Similarly, alpha 1 cubed was mset, mset 1, 1, 1. What about alpha 2 squared? Now we're going to take this mset and multiply it by itself.

How do we do that? We have to take the mset consisting of the sum of these two things. Okay, so mset 2, mset 2. Dump them together, we get mset 2, 2. Similarly, alpha sub 2 cubed will be the mset consisting of mset 2, 2, 2. How about, say, alpha 1 times alpha 2?

There's alpha 1, there's alpha 2. To multiply them, they each have only one element, so we just have to take those single elements and add them. We add mset 1 and mset 2 to get mset 1, 2. There's the product of this  like a variable alpha 1 with this  a variable alpha 2, but they're not really variables. They're just specific multi numbers. Okay, so let's do a little bit more arithmetic to try to get used to this somewhat unfamiliar framework.

Even though it's corresponding to an algebra which is very familiar to us, it's really just polynomial algebra, but now in quite a lot of different variables. Let's look at this expression here. We have alpha 0 times alpha 1 squared, and i'm not going to write the times always, plus alpha 2 cubed, alpha 4, plus 2 alpha 5 cubed. Alright, so let's write this thing out. What is alpha 0? It is the mset 1.

What is alpha 1 squared? Well, it is the mset consisting of mset 1, 1. Plus alpha 2 cubed. What was alpha 2 cubed? It was mset 2, 2, 2. Alpha 4, that's going to be mset, mset 4.

Plus 2 alpha sub 5 cubed. Okay, so there'll be two of them, or maybe I'll just put 2, 2, alpha sub 5. What's alpha sub 5? That is this thing. And we're going to cube it, so we need to put three of them together. We're going to get 5 like that.

Okay, so let's write this out in a  an mset fashion. If we multiply here, these are multiplications. Okay, multiplication, multiplication. Okay, how do we multiply these two things? We have to take an mset, and we add the contents. This is like, 1 is the mset consisting of 0.

This is the mset consisting of 1, 1. When we add them, we're going to get 0, 1, 1. And what about this next one? Here's this mset 2, 2, 2, 4. When we multiply these two things, we have to add the inner msets: 2, 2, 2, 4. And this thing here, 2, 5, 5.

Well, if we wanted to write that out, we would write it out as 5, 5, 5, 5. If we wrote this as a big mset, maybe i'll do it in a different color, wrote it as a big mset, it would be the mset consisting of 0, 1, 1, and then 2, 2, 2, 4, and 5, 5, 5, and 5, 5. And with some experience, we can just go directly from this to this. This monomial, if you like, alpha 0 alpha 1 squared, corresponds to this expression, a multi-set: 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1. This thing here, alpha 2 cubed, alpha 4, is represented by this: 2, 2, 4. And this 2 alpha sub 5 cubed is captured by those two things.

Okay, let's go the other way around. Let's have a look at this thing here, which is  written in more multi-set notation. Let's see if we can , , write this out and see what we get. Okay, so let me actually first of all maybe rewrite this in  alpha form. Okay, so what is this thing here? This thing here is a multi number.

Okay, because there's a poly number there and there's a poly number there, so it's what is this thing here? This is going to be alpha 1, alpha 5. And this thing here is going to be alpha 0 alpha 3 squared. Okay, and we have to multiply it by this thing here. This is a multi number, and inside here we have a 2 and a multi-set 1, 1, 1. The 2 is corresponding to alpha 0 squared and the 1, 1, 1 that's corresponding to, so plus alpha 1 cubed.

Okay, so now let's go back to black and let's actually calculate this product using mset multiplication. This thing has two elements, this thing has two elements, so we have to form all possible sums of these two things. The first one is 1, 5, we add it to 2. 2 is the mset 0, 0, so we get 1, 5, 0, 0. When we add this thing and this thing, we're going to get the mset 1, 5, 1, 1, 1. Adding these two, we're going to get 0, 3, 3, 0, 0.

And adding these two, we're going to get 0, 3, 3, 1, 1, 1. And now let's convert that into a  a polynomial form, if you like, in terms of alphas. Okay, so there's a bunch of terms here. These are like monomials. This thing here would be like alpha 0 squared, alpha 1, alpha 5, plus here there'll be an alpha 1 to the fourth, alpha 5 here, and alpha 0 cubed, alpha 3 squared, i guess, and here alpha 0, alpha 1 cubed, and alpha 3 squared. Okay, let's just check.

Does that actually match up with this thing here? If we just multiply this out using ordinary polynomial algebra, okay? Alpha 0 squared times alpha 1, alpha 5. Yes, that's that one there. And alpha 1 to the fourth, alpha 5, that's that one times that one. Yes.

And this one times this one, alpha 0 cubed, alpha 3 squared. Okay. And this one, alpha 0, alpha 1 cubed, alpha 3 squared. Yeah, so where it works out. This is just reinforcing the idea that what we really have here is just ordinary algebra, but with lots of different variables, with variables alpha 0, alpha 1, alpha 2, etc. It's actually already quite a rich framework.

We're getting a very general algebra in an unbounded number of variables, alpha 0, alpha 1, alpha 2. And I want to emphasize that this extends the former discussion that we've had in this series and also in the algebraic calculus course: the extension of arithmetic from poly to bipolys. What is a bipoly? Well, it's an extension of our one-dimensional approach to polys. Remember, a poly was a vertical list originally. It's like 2, 0, 1, 4 would be the poly: 2 plus 0 alpha plus 1 alpha squared plus 4 alpha cubed.

And when we extend that one-dimensional array to a two-dimensional array, then we can interpret the result as a polynomial in alpha and beta, where beta now corresponds to essentially that entry there. This bipoly here would be the original one, plus also 3 beta, plus 5 alpha beta, plus 1 alpha squared beta squared. Now in the new notation that we're introducing, we're replacing alpha with alpha 0, and so it makes sense to think of beta as being replaced with alpha 1. Okay, so we would maybe just rewrite this as 2 plus alpha 0 squared, plus 4 alpha 0 cubed, plus 3 alpha 1, plus 5 alpha 0, alpha 1, plus alpha 0 squared, alpha 1 squared. And then this thing here, as a multi number, could—let's see if we believe this. Here i'm writing it out  in terms of msets with zeros and ones.

The 2 is just 0, 0. And the alpha 0 cubed, well, there is an alpha 0 cubed. When we put it in an mset, okay, this is like 3, but you put 3 in an mset, and you get alpha 0 cubed. And here's another one, here's another one, here's another one. There's four of them. The 3 alpha 1 is here, this 1 in mset 1 is contained in a bigger mset 1, so that's really an alpha 1, and there's three of them.

And then alpha 0, alpha 1, that product is captured by this mset 0, 1 inside the big mset: 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1. And there's five of them, okay? And then alpha 0 squared, alpha 1 squared is 0, 0, 1, 1. You see that the ordinary story of poly numbers and bipoly numbers in this mset approach, we write it all out invariably just comes down to numbers: zeros and ones, zeros and ones. And the more general story, when we're allowing more variables, is to of course allow for bigger numbers in here, corresponding to variables with bigger indices. What we've done is we've created, i think, a pretty logical and tight framework for algebra, which is quite novel in some ways.

But actually, there's some surprises ahead of us. Up till now, you could get used to this and say, "okay, this is just another way of thinking about the arithmetic that i'm already familiar with." but in my next video, i'm going to show you that this actually takes us far beyond our usual experience. Okay, that we're going to be able to look at new aspects of arithmetic that we had never considered before, and that emerges actually also still staying with this poly to multi-story when we think about the third operation, right? We've had addition and multiplication. Well then there's the next operation in the sequence which you've probably already  thought about, okay? And that, well, of course, we're going to have to call that exponentiation, but it's not an exponentiation that's totally familiar to you, okay?

There's going to be some major surprises when we introduce that into this story, and it'll be almost like you'll be feeling like you're on a strange vessel in uncharted waters. I'm Norman Walberger. Thanks for listening. [Music]