# Towards a New Arithmetic !!! with msets ⧸ boxes ｜ Box Arithmetic 1 MF226 ｜ N J Wildberger

I'm Norman Wildberger, and I'm excited to introduce to you a new approach to arithmetic where we incorporate some of our understanding of the importance of the data structure called a multi-set and combine it with interesting insights from 20th-century physics to form a very viable, possible new alternative to the foundational aspects of arithmetic, which underlies most of modern mathematics. Today, I want to talk a little bit about an overview of the role of arithmetic historically, painting things with a very broad brush and just giving you a sense of where we are going to go. Arithmetic has been around, of course, for a long time, initially associated perhaps with commerce, accounting, or taxation issues in ancient civilizations. While pure mathematics was more interested in issues having to do with astronomy and related geometrical considerations, as evidenced by Euclid's foundational text, the Elements, which is very much based on geometry, there are a few chapters dedicated to rather esoteric number-theoretical considerations, such as perfect numbers, triangular numbers, primes, and factorizations. These are, of course, very important and ultimately lead to Diophantine equations and things like that, but they are perhaps of more academic interest and not firmly grounded in applied mathematics. The situation really changes when Descartes comes along and introduces his Cartesian approach to geometry, trying to clarify the definitional difficulties with Euclid's geometry by firmly establishing everything in the context of a prior number system, giving us coordinates over the plane or in higher dimensions of space.

We start with the underlying arithmetic, perhaps rational numbers or something else, and then we build a geometry on top of that by essentially creating a linear space whose points are given by n-tuples of our numbers. When people did this and looked carefully, they saw that various intuitive geometrical notions, primarily length and area, often required an extension or a seeming extension of our number system beyond the familiar rational number system, even going back to the Pythagorean conundrum with the square root of 2 as the length of a diagonal of a unit square. People started to realize that for a lot of geometrical purposes, if we want to get something that mimics our intuition, then we are forced to extend our number system in particular ways. This wasn't really clearly encoded until the 19th century when analysts, who were interested in trying to establish function theory, also started requiring a more careful view of what the artificial underlying number system was. Ultimately, this culminated in the current theory of real numbers, around the time of Cauchy, Dedekind, and Weierstrass, and was supported principally by Cantor's so-called theory of infinite sets, even though that was highly debated at the time. When the 20th century came along, the difficulties with the foundations of set theory had been circumvented a little bit by adopting a philosophical point of view.

From my point of view, it  delegated the foundations of mathematics to the philosophers with this axiomatic approach to set theory. This then became the default starting point for arithmetic also, and because set theory is, in my view, rather a suspect subject and cannot actually be very clearly laid out, it meant that the foundations of arithmetic were concurrently imbued with a shaky, murky, shimmering aspect. When we go to say von Neumann and his attempt to pin down even the basics of integer arithmetic or natural numbers from a set theory point of view, there is something a little bit forced about that, I think it's fair to say, a little bit artificial. But mathematicians have felt that there's no real alternative because we've all agreed that set theory is the proper foundation of mathematics, and therefore by default, it's the natural place to look at for the foundations of arithmetic as well. Because I'm not a believer in Zermelo-Fraenkel axiomatics, I don't think axiomatics should play any  role in the foundations of analysis, calculus, or even arithmetic. I'm looking for alternative ways, and it's my firm view that the crucial data structure is not that of a set as far as the foundations of arithmetic go, but actually the multi-set.

This is one very clear distinction between what I'm proposing and what everybody else is thinking. For me, it's the multi-sets that provide the arena where we can really have a rich arithmetic. That's one of the key starting points. We're going to be developing arithmetic from very first principles just by thinking about multi-sets and what we can do with them from a very naive point of view. A little bit down the road, when we start thinking about making the transition from natural number arithmetic to integer arithmetic, we're going to see that we have to start thinking in a way that's outside the usual formats of modern mathematics and drawing inspiration from the physicists, in particular from Paul Dirac's remarkable discovery of the equation of the electron and concurrent particle-antiparticle duality. The subject that's going to be emerging here, although initially we'll be framing it in terms of multi-sets, is ultimately going to be called "box arithmetic." It will be, I think, a very novel place and an opportunity to rethink all kinds of things and to put mathematics on a much wider and more interesting foundation.

We're going to see that arithmetic actually extends far beyond what we currently think it does. Another one of my main motivations is to ultimately connect our subject much more explicitly and directly with computational reality. For me, this is the litmus test of whether our pronouncements and discussions actually correspond to something real. Ultimately, we want to be able to illustrate what we're doing so explicitly, so concretely, so precisely that a computer can do it. This, of course, removes from consideration so much of modern 20th-century-style infinite analyses. I think we have to let go of that, people.

We have to let go of that and move into a much clearer, much more concise, and much more logical approach that is firmly and always connected with computational reality. A big adventure is about to start for us, with lots of opportunities for thinking outside the box with box arithmetic. I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.