# Alternating ⧸ symmetric polynumbers： a missing chapter of Algebra ｜ Math Foundations 234 ｜ N J W

[Music] Hello everyone, I'm Norman Wildberger. We're talking about box arithmetic, and a big thank you to all my Patreon supporters and members of the Wild Egg Mathematics channel. Today, we're going to be extending our algebra that we're developing in quite a novel direction, almost a missing chapter of, say, high school algebra, what we get when we enlarge our view of polynomials to include the  Laurent-type polynomials with negative exponents. This is going to allow us to analyze more carefully this notion of symmetry and anti-symmetry, or alternating aspect of poly numbers that I introduced last time. At the end of the video, I'm actually going to connect the main objects that we're going to be creating today, which are going to be called central poly numbers, with actually a whole range of different mathematical topics. Some of them are quite important, in fact,  really central importance in 20th-century mathematics and physics.

I'll just touch base very quickly with those things, but i want you to appreciate that even though we're doing very elementary things here, okay, we are arriving at objects which are really very, very fundamental for mathematics and physics. Okay, so before we get onto that though, let's just enlarge our arithmetic a little bit and introduce subtraction to our operations that we're doing with these M sets. It's simple enough because we have a minus one now. We can define if a and b are m sets or anti-m sets, or maybe if we want to include both of them at the same time, i might say a/m sets, okay, to include the families of m sets and anti-m sets and combinations of them. Then we'll define a minus b to be simply a plus one-bar b, or in other words, a plus minus one times b. Here's an example.

Here's an M set, perhaps A, and here's another M set, perhaps B, and we're taking the difference A minus B. This thing here, okay, , minus this thing here. The definition is that we should take the same thing here and instead we should add minus one, there's minus one times this second one. Now in terms of a more standard notation, this thing here, you see here, it has a 2 inside it, has an empty M set that represents zero, and this thing here is an anti-one, okay, so that's what this thing is. And this thing here, well, there's a two, there's another two, so two, two. There's a one bar, okay, it's the negation of one, and here is just an anti-zero, okay.

When we multiply the second one with the minus one, what do we get? Okay, well, multiplying by minus one, what it does is it takes all of the entries and it takes their antis. That means that all the bounding boxes have to change color from black to red or from red to black. This one here is going to change into a red box with two black ones, same with this. This one here is going to change into a red box with a red box inside. This one here is just going to change from an anti-zero to a zero, okay.

And once we have this, then the addition is of course just the usual combining them. We just put everything in an m box, but when we do that, this thing here, this 2 and this anti-2 are going to annihilate each other because these things are antis. They're antis because the bounding box, the containers are of different colors, one's black and one's red, and otherwise inside they're identical. They're identical except that one's the anti of the other. They're going to annihilate. We'll still have one more of them left over, we'll have two empty boxes, and we'll have one of these and one of these.

And then when we list what we have, we have one bar anti, so that's that thing there, okay. And if it was black on the outside, that would be a one bar, but it's red on the outside, so it's a one bar anti. There's two zeros, there's our anti-2, and this is an anti-one, okay. That's how we do subtraction in this m set world. Okay, so when we went from poly numbers to integral poly numbers, the big step was that we went from M sets of natural numbers to M sets of integers. And that means we have an interpretation now of polynomials with also negative integer exponents, not just natural number exponents.

These are integral poly numbers. And in this world, there's this fundamental symmetry, the sigma  reflection that takes Alpha to the N to Alpha to the minus N. And then with respect to that, we defined an I poly to be symmetric if sigma of P equals P, and anti-symmetric or alternating if sigma P equals minus P or P bar. And I claim that the study of symmetric and alternating integral poly numbers is really something of a missing chapter of very elementary algebra, something that you could have been taught back in early high school. But because the emphasis there is strictly towards the positive exponent side of things, polynomials, this is not visible, okay. We want to remedy that today, and we'll do that by starting with the two important families of integral polynomials, the a_ns, which are going to be alternating, and the b_ns, which are going to be symmetric.

And we're going to define them for arbitrary natural numbers N, so for arbitrary integers N. A sub n for any integer n and also b sub n for any integer n. We could also restrict this to natural numbers, but I think it's more convenient if we do this in this  more natural generality, okay. Let's start with the symmetric ones. We might call them symmetric binomials. B sub N is an integer.

Here's the definition. B sub N is the M set consisting of N and N bar. That's an integer and that's its negation. The n corresponds to alpha to the n, and the n bar corresponds to what we might call alpha to the minus n. We're taking this obviously symmetric integral poly number, okay. What do they look like?

Well, here's  a list near zero. When N is zero, then both of these things are zero. We're getting zero, zero, in the, that's the number two. It's important to make a note of that, okay. B sub zero is two, not one, as you might otherwise think. And then B sub one is going to be Alpha to the minus one plus Alpha.

B sub two is Alpha to the minus two plus Alpha squared, etc. And B to the minus one is Alpha to the minus one plus Alpha to the minus minus one. It's alpha to the minus one plus alpha. It's the same as B sub one, okay. And B sub minus two, I should put minus two there, B sub minus two is Alpha to the minus two plus Alpha squared. That's again the same as B sub two, okay.

These are something of a basis for the symmetric integral poly numbers. And what's particularly interesting is what happens when you multiply two of them. Let's look at b3 times b5. There's B3, Alpha to the minus three plus Alpha cubed. B5, Alpha to the minus five plus Alpha to the five. And when we multiply them, we get Alpha to the minus eight.

This combination here is Alpha to the minus two. This combination here is Alpha to the two. And this combination is Alpha to the eight. And we see that what we're picking up is a B2 and a B8, okay. And note that the sum of three plus five is eight and the difference here is two, okay. If we squared one, so let's say take B sub four and we square it.

There it is there. We square it. Well, we get the square of the first term, which is Alpha to the minus eight. Square of the second term, which is Alpha to the eight. And twice the product, we get two. That is then b zero.

There's B zero and Alpha to the eight plus Alpha to the minus eight is B eight. And again, this zero is like the difference between the four and the four. And this eight is like the sum of the four and four. As we've already noted, b sub n is the m set n bar n. Clearly, B sub N bar is equal to B sub N because these two things just interchange places. And the formula that we've just looked at, a special case of, is that B sub M times B sub N equals B sub M minus N plus B sub M plus N.

And there's no restriction here on the indices. They can be arbitrary integers. A little bit more sophisticated is what happens when you multiply three of them together, say B sub M, B sub N, B sub P. Then it's an exercise for you to check that you're going to get four terms. You're going to get a B sub M minus N minus P, B sub M plus N minus P, B sub M minus N plus P, and B sub M plus N plus P. And remember that any one of these things is unchanged if we negate the index.

For example, b nine times b four times b three, nine minus four minus three is two, nine plus four minus three is ten, nine minus four plus three is eight, and nine plus four plus three is sixteen. And it also works when zero is involved. B seven, b four, b three, seven minus four minus three is zero. B seven plus four, seven plus four minus three is eight, seven minus four plus three is six, and seven plus four plus three is fourteen. And do note that this B zero being two is, , consistent,  essential for these formulas to work. A little exercise for you, try to figure out what the binomial expansion looks like in this case.

Just a variant of the usual one, but it's worthwhile clarifying. If we take b sub m for an arbitrary integer m and we raise it to the k, where k is a natural number, like zero, one, two, three, etc., what do we get when we expand all of that out? The b_n poly numbers were pretty well the simplest symmetric integral poly numbers. Here are pretty well the simplest alternating integral poly numbers, the A sub Ns. They're going to be defined also for n, an integer. And they're defined in a very similar way.

A sub N is the M set consisting of N with anti-N bar, okay. And the anti has the effect of introducing a coefficient of -1. We'll write -alpha to the minus n plus alpha to the n. And then we see that now if we negate the index N, A sub N bar, we get the negation of A sub N. And here are some examples. A sub zero is importantly zero, because when n is zero, there's a zero here and a zero anti, and the zero and the zero anti annihilate, and we just get an empty set, or we just get zero.

A sub one is -Alpha to the minus one plus Alpha. A sub two is -Alpha to the minus two plus Alpha squared. And A sub minus one is the negative of this one, so Alpha to the minus one minus Alpha. A sub minus two is the negative of this one, so it's Alpha to the minus two minus Alpha squared, and so on. Let's do a general multiplication. Let's multiply A sub M times A sub N.

There's a sub m, there's a sub n. When we multiply, we get four terms. The product of these two is alpha to the minus m plus n. The product of this one and this one, or maybe this one and this one, is -Alpha to the M minus N. The product of these two is -Alpha to the N minus M, and the product of these two is Alpha to the M plus N. And from that, we can see that the product is actually, well, this thing here, these two terms, okay, are getting -B sub M minus N.

We have to take these two out, and then we get two plus signs, and we're getting b sub m minus n, which is the same as b sub n minus m. And these outside terms, both also with positive one coefficients, giving us B sub M plus N, because here's Alpha to the M plus N and Alpha to the minus M plus N. The product of these two a's is a sum of two b's. And you might like to write down the corresponding formula for the product of three of these A sub Ns, and also how do you take the corresponding binomial power of a given A sub M, again K being a natural number. It's not too hard to see that if you have two symmetric integral poly numbers and you multiply them, you're going to get another symmetric one. If you have two alternating ones and you multiply them, you're going to get a symmetric one.

However, if you have an alternating one times a symmetric one, in that case, you're going to get an alternating one. That's the formula that we're going to look at now. What happens when we multiply an alternating binomial with a symmetric binomial? A sub M, there it is there, times B sub N, there it is there. Well, just four terms, just as before, we get a -Alpha to the minus M plus N, we get an Alpha M, Alpha minus N, Alpha to the M minus N, and these terms, Alpha to the N minus M with a minus sign, and a plus sign with Alpha to the M plus N. And then these two terms here, these ones, Alpha to the M minus N minus Alpha to the N minus M, that's A sub M minus N.

And these outside ones are A sub M plus N. Now the A's, remember, are alternating. If we negate the index there, which we also could, then we'd have to put a minus sign, so we could also write it as -a sub n minus m plus a sub n plus m. This is a nice formula. And a very interesting and important special case is when M is just one. M is just one.

In that case, you get A1 times B N equals -A N minus one plus A N plus one. And that then has the consequence with this little formula here, which we might call a lemma, okay, that if you have a chain of B's, B sub K, B sub K plus two, B sub K plus four, so going up by two each step, up to some B sub L, so these are separated by an even number of steps, then the result of multiplying by A1 is -A sub K minus one, so one less than that index, plus A sub L plus one, one bigger than that index. And the reason is,  immediate from this, because when you multiply the A1 times the BK, you're getting a -A sub K minus one, that's that term there, plus a plus A sub K plus one. But that plus A sub K plus one that you've just got is going to be canceled with the term that you're going to get by multiplying the A1 times the B K plus two, the left term. It's going to actually exactly cancel that because you're going to get A sub K plus one and A sub K plus three, okay. In the intermediate spaces between these things, the two a's that you're getting from the left and from the right always have opposite signs, and so they're going to cancel.

And all that's going to be left is the one to the left of the left one and the one to the right of the right one. Now, there's  two special cases of this also. When K equals one, in this formula, if we start with one and they go out by two, so one, three, five, up to some L, then the first term is going to be -A sub zero, because one minus one is zero. And that's zero, so there'll only be one term, that's A sub L plus one. On the other hand, if K equals two, and we look at  even ones, if we start just with B two, B four, B six, all the way up to B M, then the formula is going to tell us what we should get is -A sub one plus A sub M plus one. But A sub one, okay, is...

There'll be that on this side here, it's the same as over here. We can bring it to the left-hand side by putting an a one there, okay. If we rewrite the formula that you get by starting with this one, with b sub two, we rewrite it and bring the a sub one that we get over here, then the result is just a single a sub m plus one on the right-hand side. In both cases, if we have a string of b's that are going up by two each time, and we multiply by a one, we are getting a single a. In fact, the A just has an index one bigger than the biggest B that appears in each of these cases. That's a quite important  formula, which motivates us to the definition of the objects that actually we're really interested in, which are the central poly numbers, denoted by C sub N, okay.

The central poly numbers, c sub n, and now we'll stick with natural number indices, n equals zero, one, two, etc. C sub zero is just going to be one. C sub one is going to be Alpha to the minus one plus Alpha, so it's symmetric, that's the same as B one. There's a picture of c zero in terms of a mass distribution or a density, single mass of unit size sitting above zero. Here's a picture of C one, unit masses above one and minus one on our integral number line. C two is going to be Alpha to the minus two plus one plus Alpha squared, that's one plus B two.

It has three equal masses, equally separated on the number line, symmetric about zero at minus two, at zero, at two. C three, similarly, Alpha to the minus three plus Alpha to the minus one plus Alpha plus Alpha cubed, that's B one plus B three, represented by four equally spaced unit masses, symmetric around zero at minus three, minus one, one, and three. And then we carry on like this. C four is one plus B two plus B four,  corresponding to the even powers of B, except that's not B zero, okay. That's only half of B zero, that's why I write it separately. One plus b two plus b four.

Well, the odd ones, B one plus B three plus B four are like that. We just  follow that pattern for even and for odd. C four is alpha to the minus four, going up by steps of two all the way up to alpha to the four. C five, going from Alpha to the minus five to Alpha five, including all the intermediate powers, which are separated from the bottom by a multiple of two as we go up, minus five, minus three, minus one, one, three, five. These are the central polynomials. They're all symmetric, okay.

You should think about them as being perhaps a somewhat more sophisticated or a little bit more complicated variant to the b's. They also form a basis of the symmetric poly numbers. If we have an arbitrary symmetric polynomial, we can write it uniquely in terms of the b's. But it's not too hard to see we can also write it uniquely in terms of the C's. And the C's are a little bit more sophisticated, but they're also a little bit more uniform. And it turns out that they're connected with a huge amount of significant mathematics, okay.

Very briefly now, i just want to indicate very roughly all the remarkable, or at least some of the remarkable aspects to these central poly numbers, c zero, c one, c two, c three, c four, etc., that we've defined going on in this direction, okay. They're connected with so many important aspects of 20th-century mathematics and physics. Let's start here, okay. They're intimately connected with Chebyshev polynomials, which you will have run into, actually Chebyshev polynomials of the second kind, which you will have run into if you're a member of my Wild Egg Mathematics courses YouTube channel, where I have a whole series on interesting families of orthogonal polynomials and how to look at them in a somewhat novel linear algebra/number theory point of view. They're related to Gaussian binomial coefficients and Q series, okay. And there's also, in fact, over at Wild Egg, there's also a series of videos that I'm doing on Q series, and the Gaussian binomial coefficients figure very prominently there.

These are in some sense variants of the gaussian binomial coefficients, which are in some cases more natural or maybe more useful than the gaussian binomial coefficients, but not in all cases. There's a good reason for studying both of them. And in fact, that other point of view is closely related to quantum groups. Also in physics, these things are coming out very naturally in angular momentum quantum mechanics. They figure prominently in representation theory of Lie groups, okay. In the world of lie groups, there are things called compact simple lie groups, and the simplest one is su2.

The simplest non-abelian one is SU2, okay, and something called representation theory. And it turns out that these things here are essentially the characters, the irreducible characters of SU2 when you view them in the right way. And as such, they're also intimately connected with harmonic analysis on the three-dimensional sphere, not the two-dimensional sphere that we find in our space, but the three-dimensional sphere, which is another manifestation of SU2. But you can do  spherical harmonics on that thing, and it turns out that these things are intimately connected with spherical harmonics on S3. They're very close to the Weyl character formula, and arguably, I've already shown you the Weyl character formula today in the simplest of all cases, okay. I actually also have to put in, yeah, I have to put in another ADE graphs, okay.

ADE graphs, so the Weyl character formula applies to all of these graphs. But in the AN case,  a special case, this is actually the simplest A case. It's the A1 case. This is like the simplest version of some huge story. And there's also a series in my Wild Egg Mathematics course channel all about ADE graphs and dynamics on graphs, and , and these things will figure there. Hypergroups, well, on this channel, I have a series called Diffusion Symmetry, where I'm introducing you to the world of hypergroups.

These are very close to being really central objects in hypergroup theory, okay. I'm going to be meeting them in that series of videos. Closely connected with that, they're intimately connected with random walks. And going back to physics, they're intimately connected with modern theory, the electroweak force in physics. There's a lot to this story. But in fact, I have this  aspiration to explain a lot of this stuff, maybe all of it at some point.

But in any case, since this series is only dealing with elementary algebra, I want to alert you that this very naive point of view, we're just playing around with M sets, and now we have these integral poly numbers, etc., and what's arising  naturally as we're just following our nose, doing the simplest possible thing, are objects whose algebraic structure is actually completely key in a lot of really important areas. And I want to talk more about what the nature of that algebraic structure is. It has to do with the multiplicative structure of these central poly numbers. And you might like to play around with that and ask yourself, what happens if I multiply, say, C3 times C7? Okay, symmetric polynomials, what's the product going to be? That's an interesting question.

We'll talk about that in our next video. I hope you'll join me for that. I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening. [Music]