# The curious world of integral polynumbers ｜ Math Foundations 233 ｜ N J Wildberger

Foreign [Music] I'm Norman Wildberger. We're setting out a new foundation for arithmetic and algebra, in fact, mathematics more generally, based on multi-sets and thinking about numbers and polynomials and consequent algebra, all built in terms of these multi-sets. A key  novelty in this approach is that we end up having to adopt some of the 20th-century physicists' ideas having to do with particle-antiparticle duality to create a theory of negative numbers. We've done that, and now we're in a position to reap some of the very important consequences. I'm aspiring here not just to create a new foundation for the subject but also to position us in a way that we can see things in a new light. You're going to see that happening very strongly today.

We're going to be looking at polynomials with a new point of view that will open up all kinds of interesting developments, and in fact, it will turn out that we will end up being able to reinterpret some very important 20th-century physics developments in terms of this very elementary algebra. We're heading in that direction. Okay, so we're going to be talking about integral polynomials. Let me remind you that a poly number itself is an mset of natural numbers. For example, here there's an mset of natural numbers interpreted as 2 plus alpha plus 3 alpha to the 4, and here's our usual convention in the algebraic calculus course, for example, for expressing such a poly number. Now somewhat novel, an integral poly number is an mset of integers now, so that includes not just natural numbers like this but also negative numbers.

I like to often express negative numbers with the natural numbers with a bar over them, so this is minus three, that's minus three, that's minus one, etc. Now this corresponds on the polynomial side, in terms of powers of alpha, to the following: this is really two, there's two of these alpha to the minus three or three bar, there is a single alpha to the one bar or alpha to the minus one, there's a one, and then there's three alpha. Perhaps more usually, if we  adopt the usual convention for negative signs, in a more familiar way it would be 2 alpha to the minus 3 plus alpha to the minus 1 plus 1 plus 3 alpha. In algebra, this is not a polynomial because there are negative powers of the variable appearing, sometimes called a laurent polynomial or sometimes a rational function. In any case, we are going to augment this notation, make it a little bit bigger, to allow us to incorporate also coefficients of negative powers of alpha in  an obvious way, but we're going to have a little bit of an addition now. The one plus three alpha will be represented by the one here and the three, so this would be the usual poly number story.

What I'm now going to do is include the coefficients of alpha to the minus one, alpha to the minus 2, alpha to the minus 3 up above here, and now there's a  a symmetry here which will become very important in this lecture. There's a symmetry here where this central object, which is the coefficient of just the constant term,  plays a central role now. The strictly positive and strictly negative ones are on either side of it, and so to make that clear, I'm going to put a double bar there. Those two bars are going to frame the constant term or the alpha to the zero coefficient. All right, so that's what an integral poly number is, and we're going to be seeing some interesting things about these things today. Now, we particularly like doing arithmetic in the domain of integers, so we're also going to allow ourselves to consider integers as coefficients of our powers of alpha, and that manifests itself in having anti-integers inside our mset defining the poly number or the integral poly number.

Have a look at this thing here: this is an ordinary poly number with natural number entries here, but some of them have antis. There's a zero anti-zero anti-one, one, one, three, anti, and these two zero antis are representing the number minus two. If we just had an mset zero anti-zero anti or anti-zero anti-zero, that would be the number minus two or two bar. There are still three alphas here, represented by these three ones, and there's a single alpha cubed, but there's an anti here, so we have to take minus that. In conventional notation with the more usual conventions, this would be minus two plus three alpha minus alpha cubed. That's a poly number, but now we can combine these two different roles of integers here and consider integral poly numbers also with integer coefficients.

That means that inside here we have integers, not just natural numbers but also negative numbers like negative one and negative two, etc., but we also have antis. This is a two bar, anti-one bar, anti-one bar, anti. It corresponds to this two bar, corresponds to alpha to the minus two or alpha, it's the two bar, but the anti means that there's minus one of them. There's a minus one or minus alpha to the minus two represented by that thing there. There's two of these one bar antis, so the one bar is telling us that we're talking about alpha to the minus one, and the antis representing the fact that we don't have two of them, we have minus two of them. Minus two alpha to the minus one or, in more legally, plus two bar alpha one bar, and then there's a zero that represents one, and these three twos give us three alpha squared.

If we want the usual notation for negative numbers, we could also rewrite the mset. Instead of having two bar, we could write minus two, so instead of the one bar we could write minus one, etc. It amounts to the same thing, but there's a lot of negatives here, and there is definitely the possibility of confusion here with this minus sign. The minus sign being here, even though it's very familiar, it's in the place where an operation usually is. There's an operation sign there, and it looks like there's an operation sign here, but you have to  interpret that the operation sign is not really an operation sign; it's rather negating the two. This is not really optimal notation, so gently i want to move you a little bit towards something more in this direction where the operations and the negations are more clearly delineated.

Now when we're doing calculus or analysis, there is a big difference between the world of polynomials and the world of rational functions, what we're calling the difference between polynomials and integral polynumbers. That's what you get when you view all these things as functions. In 20th-century mathematics, the idea of a function was all-pervasive. A lot of things were attempted to be framed in terms of functions, a rule that assigns something of a certain kind as input and then gives you an output of some other potentially different kind. In my view, this  active role of functions is overplayed. It's too frequent a concept in modern mathematics, and it leads to a lot of confusion because this dynamic aspect of taking an input and doing something to get an output necessarily really involves a deep dive into computational issues, issues of programming, issues of computation, issues then correspondingly of memory and language, etc.

I'm going to strongly advocate to you that you should not think about polynomials or poly numbers or integral polynomials as functions primarily. If you're an undergraduate and have done a mathematics degree, this will be  so ingrained into your thinking that it will be a bit of a challenge to move back from that, but it has a lot of benefits. Okay, so the usual story, let's look at it with a distinction between these two examples. Here is a poly number on this side, and here's an integral poly number. This one is 0, 1, anti-3, 3, corresponding to the polynomial 1 minus alpha plus two alpha cubed in the usual notation. Here, there's a  a negation of this in some sense, so we're  replacing each of the numbers here with their negatives.

We have a three bar, three bar, a one bar, anti, and a zero, and that corresponds to the integral poly number 2 times alpha to the minus 3 minus alpha to the minus 1 plus 1. Now in a calculus course or an analysis course, you would look at these things in terms of functions. You'd say, aha, this thing here really represents a function, say y equals P of x given by this polynomial. You input x and you output y, and correspondingly this thing here is also a function, 2 over x cubed minus 1 over x plus one. You input x, you output y. But in the world of functions, these things are hugely different for one obvious reason: as a function, this thing here with the x in the denominator requires you to avoid an input of zero.

Because if you put in zero here, it doesn't give you anything that's defined. The domain of this thing is automatically different from the domain of this, but also visually, in terms of a graph, they are very different kinds of objects. There's a graph of this thing here, a  familiar cubic  shape, and here is perhaps less familiar, somewhat hyperbolic shape with this singularity at x equals zero represented by these two branches that go up and down here. A manifestation of the huge difference between these two things is when we come to the fundamental question of integration in calculus. Now if you say integrate this thing from, say, one to two over this interval here, the area of that turns out to be exactly seven. That's an exact calculation.

Well, over here the corresponding integral from one to two of this function turns out, if I ask my computer, it's 7 over 4 minus log 2. It's a standard integral that high school students or undergraduates learn to do. Now we say this answer here rather glibly, but really this answer is a hugely computationally problematic because this log 2 here represents a process which doesn't actually terminate, so you can't actually compute it. The question about whether there is an "it" that we're legitimately talking about here is highly questionable. If you ask your computer, well, it'll just spew out some number of digits, but it's clear that you're not able to really obtain this thing exactly. It's important to state, as i've done in many places, this thing over here is intrinsically an approximate calculation, while this one over here is exact.

There is a world of difference between these two computations. This is really applied mathematics, and over here this is pure mathematics. Moreover, in the algebraic calculus course, we learn that we can do this  integral without any of the infinite machinery that's used in classical calculus or analysis courses, in terms of Riemann integration, in terms of setting up Riemann sums and subdividing things and having rectangles and upper and lower bounds, etc., and then taking some limit as the net or the size of the rectangles goes to zero. We can completely avoid that and stay completely in a purely polynomial, purely finite  calculating algebraic situation. That's a big departure from the usual calculus story found in the algebraic calculus course lectures over on the wild egg mathematics channel. This really is an exact theory.

We do not need Riemann integration or Lebesgue integration, absolutely not. We can address this  integral in a completely algebraic way, but this thing here is necessarily approximate. You can see that from the calculus point of view, there is in fact, yes, a huge difference between this object and this object, especially when we view them as functions. But I'm going to ask you here, because we're doing arithmetic, we're doing algebra, to step back from this calculus orientation, calculus over there, and look in this direction rather at algebra. When we're just looking at the algebraic side, the distinction between these two things is much less obvious. In fact, they're actually very close to being  symmetrical.

We're taking an algebraic approach; we're letting go of the function concept. How then are we to interpret what the meaning of these poly numbers are, whether they're poly numbers or integral poly numbers? Let me give you an alternate way of thinking about what these things are or at least how to interpret them in a  a visual or a physical fashion. Actually, the question of what they are is already contained in the definition: they are just multi-sets of natural numbers or multi-sets of integers. That's what they actually are. But now the question is, how do we think about them?

Here is what i'm proposing: that we're going to think about these things as densities or measures. It's like we have a number line, and it's actually  a discrete number line for us currently. So, , imagine the natural numbers  strung out on a line here: there's zero, there's one, we'd mark these things, there's two, three, etc. We're going to think about a poly number like this one, 2 minus alpha plus 3 alpha to the fourth, as being a bunch of weights which are positioned over these various natural number positions. The weights can be bigger or they can be smaller, they can also be negative, corresponding to  like, , an upward force instead of a downward force. It's like a density or a measure.

This thing here, 2 minus alpha plus 3 alpha to the fourth, it's going to be represented physically or visually by this mass distribution. The way you should think about this, here's the number line, and you see here there's a  a stack of two things. Think of this as like a unit weight of some kind, a little metal bar perhaps. There's two of them stacked up on top of zero, that's corresponding to that two. Down here there's  one in the negative direction, corresponding to a negative force, so it's down in that direction, that's corresponding to the minus alpha. Over here there's three of them over the four, that's corresponding to three alpha to the four.

Having done that, the transition to an integral poly number or an I-poly is not hard. We're just going to extend this story where now the base number line goes into two directions. Now zero is in the middle there somewhere, and one is over here, and two is there, and over on this side minus one, minus two, etc. It extends in this direction as well as this direction. Now we have more room to put weights, positive or negative. That's all we're doing, we're just extending the number line from  a one-sided discrete framework to a two-sided discrete framework.

This thing here, alpha to the minus three, minus three alpha to the minus two, plus four, plus alpha squared, there it's represented. There's an alpha to the minus three represented by this point here, minus three on our number line, and there is a weight of one because there's one of these. Then over minus two or under minus two there's a weight of three because it's minus three alpha to the minus two. Over zero there's four, that's representing that thing, and over the two there's just a single one representing the alpha squared. This is visualized as a density or measure on the positive number line, essentially a discrete number line indexed by natural numbers, while this one over here is visualized as a density or measure on the entire two-sided number line, which is again discrete and labeled by integers. In this  continuum here, or this  step-by-step, there are also more elaborate algebraic objects, also built from poly numbers in a natural way, called rational functions, which are just quotients of poly numbers.

That is a bigger theory in some sense. You can, of course, think about these things as being  special cases of this, but we should just be aware that further on down the road we do ultimately want to talk about these things as well. From the calculus point of view, these things are even much more complicated and sophisticated than the problems that we get with the I-poly and the 1 over x. The complexity is massively bigger. That's not properly understood in most calculus courses. But we're sticking here with this framework.

Now we have a somewhat balanced point of view on how to think about what poly numbers are, how to think about what integral poly numbers are, and they're pretty well the same kinds of things, just over different domains. Let me explain how you should think about the arithmetic of these integral poly numbers with this  density or measure point of view. The addition is pretty easy. Here's an example: p is alpha to the minus two plus one plus two alpha, alpha to the minus two, that weight, the one over the zero, and the two stacked on top of the one representing two alpha. Over here is another one, minus two alpha to the minus one, so weight of minus two at minus one and a weight of one at one. If we add these things, what we do is we just add the two densities, we just combine them in the obvious way.

If we combine these two things, there's the number line, so that density is coming from there, that one's coming from there, and two of these are coming from there. Then when we add this one, we have to put this 2 down here under the minus one, and we have to put another one on top of the one, so we get this picture here, which corresponds to the polynomial alpha to the minus two minus two alpha to the minus one plus one plus three alpha. Now the multiplication, however, is more complicated and more interesting and corresponds to what's called in measure theory convolution. This convolution of these two measures, let me try to illustrate what's going on here. Here's the result that we get just by doing the algebraic product. The way we do it visually is we say, okay, what we're going to do is we're going to take this thing here, think of this thing as a fixed mass distribution which is  centered at zero.

It's centered at zero, fixed mass distribution, and we're going to put various copies down of it in various positions to make a cumulative mass distribution. The places where those copies go and the sizes of the contributions are determined by this one. Let me illustrate that here. Over here, there is a one at minus two. That's a minus two. What I'm going to do is I'm going to move over here so that I'm  centered at minus two temporarily, and I'm going to put a copy of this thing, which is currently centered at zero.

Just imagine copying it down here. I'm not going to, maybe i'm not going to write the bars, i'm just going to go like this, representing that minus 2 there. That's  one over from where we're centered here. We've put that one there, and there's also a one going up one to the right. That one up there. This mass distribution here is just a copy of this one, but it's suitably translated so that it's centered at minus two.

Now the next one is zero. This thing here has a weight of zero, that means we have to take a copy of one of these because it has weight to zero and translate it so that it's centered at zero. Well, that's exactly where it is already. That means we have to take this thing and basically just copy it down here. What does that mean? Well, under minus one we have two.

I'll do it like that. Over one we have a one. We've copied this thing so it's centered at zero. Now in addition, we have to take this thing here and we have to copy it so that it's centered at one. But now we have to also double that mass distribution because there's a factor or weight of two here. Really we have to take two times this thing and position it so that it's centered at one.

Let's do that. Let me take this thing here, and I'm going to center it at one, but I'm also going to multiply it by two. This thing here, which is a weight of  negative two, is going to come down from here to weight minus two, but then it's also going to keep going exactly multiplied by two. There's really a weight of 4 there. That's centered at one. Then on the right of that at two, we have to also put one of these, but I also have to double it, so not just one, I have to go up like this.

That's how we convolve things. We take a copy of this thing and basically make copies of it in various places determined by the positions and the weights determined by this other one. Let me just see if we get the same thing that we did algebraically. Here there's a minus two alpha to the minus three, yes. What about alpha to the minus one? Well, you see here there's some cancellation because there's  a positive weight and there's also minus two weight, so the total weight is minus one at minus one.

There's a minus alpha minus one here, there's a weight of minus four, here there's a weight of plus one, and here there's a weight of two at alpha squared. That's the same thing that we would get. Now you can convince yourself that this is the same thing that we would get if we interchange the roles of these two things. In other words, if we took this thing and made copies of it according to the weights and positions of these guys over here. I'll let you check that we're going to get the same thing. This is showing you that in this interpretation of having densities or measures, the addition corresponds to just a cumulative addition of these measures in the simplest possible way, while the multiplication is also attractive but corresponds to this important operation called convolution, which is important in engineering and analysis and many things.

It arises in many places, but this is an elementary way that it arises when we have this interpretation of these integral poly numbers as densities or measures on this discrete number line labeled by integers. Now I want to suggest to you that this way of thinking that I'm giving you here actually has a really great consequence just a little bit further down the road when we're in possession of rational numbers. Currently we've got natural numbers and integers. We don't have rational numbers yet, but that will not be a big ask because we all  know how to go from integers to rational numbers in some fashion or another, in terms of formal quotients or ordered pairs or something like that. That's not going to be too much work. But once we do have rational numbers as part of our number system here, then we're going to be able to adopt this point of view exactly that I'm expressing here in this video to really expand our minds about the objects that we think of in analysis in one way.

We're going to be able to think about them in a very different way from an algebraic point of view. Once we extend our number system to the rational numbers, then we can make the following definition: that a rational poly number is then an mset of rational numbers. obviously. For example, here then is an mset of rational numbers. Here's rational number two-thirds, two-thirds, 15 over seven, zero. These bars over here are just negative, so this is negative two-thirds, negative two-thirds, and this anti is the usual antis, that's an anti-zero.

In terms of a poly number or a rational poly number, there's two of these minus two-thirds, so that would correspond to, we would write that down in alpha notation as 2 times alpha to the minus two-thirds because there's two-thirds appearing here. Actually, minus two-thirds appear here, so we get alpha to the minus two-thirds, two of them. There's a minus one because there's an anti-zero, and this fifteen over seven would correspond to alpha to the 15 over 7. Think about this for a second. We are creating these things as legitimate mathematical objects without a prior theory of cube roots or seventh roots. If you go into a first-year calculus course and you say, what do we mean by the function y equals x to the 15 over 7?

Well, that's not going to be so easy for them to explain. They'll try to tell you that this is a function that involves raising something to the 15th power and also taking a one-seventh root. Then you ask them, well, how do you take a one-seventh root, and they go, I don't know, you use a calculator. That's the way they think about it. They think this is something that inputs a number and then you have to use a calculator involving this rather complicated seventh root operation in order to calculate the result. What we're doing here is invoking this as a legitimate mathematical object without any mention of seventh roots or cube roots or anything else.

It's just a multi-set of rational numbers, and it can be represented physically in a very parallel way to what I've already explained. It's just that now our number line is to be thought of as being expanded, not just discrete in terms of the natural numbers or the integers, we're also considering rational number positions, rational numbers completely obtainable in a finite amount of way, no infinite processes or dreaming required. This thing here, well, we just find the point minus two-thirds on our number line somewhere between zero and minus one, and over that point, well, there's two of these, so we put a weight of two over minus two-thirds. Anti, oh, here's zero, yes, here's zero, there's minus one of them, so we put a weight of minus one at zero, and over here, fifteen over seven, it's a little bit more than two, there's that point. Over that point, we put a weight of one. There it is, there's no irrationalities involved here at all, there's no irrationalities in sight whatsoever.

That is such an important point to make. We are doing something different from what you find in undergraduate courses. We're looking at things from a different point of view. It's all just msets. Now with this framework, we're in a position to introduce something really exciting, which is a fundamental symmetry in this situation. Here's our number line: there's zero, natural numbers over here, one, two, three, negative numbers over here, minus one, minus two, minus three.

There is a symmetry here. We can look this way, we can look this way, they look pretty well the same in both directions, just this is going to the right and this is going to the left for you. It is the symmetry, that reflection symmetry about this central point. If you've been watching my math and music series, I talk about symmetry in the piano and the difference between translation symmetry and reflection symmetry. It's actually an important topic. This is an example of where the reflection symmetry about zero plays an important role.

Typically speaking, if we're thinking of a number line as giving us positional information, we have some physical structure and we want to allocate positions to various things, maybe it's a road and these are our street numbers, or it's an industrial assembly line and here's the various markers on the assembly line. When we have that  thing, the translation invariance is almost always more important than the symmetry. But in this situation here, we're looking at the number line as a representation of this arithmetical structure. It's not just positions we're talking about, we're talking about having arithmetic here, and in arithmetic, zero does play a very distinguished role. Zero is very special, it's like the most important point on the number line. The symmetry about zero naturally plays a role in arithmetic, as opposed to the piano, you're not doing arithmetic on the keys, you're just going up and down.

It's the translation invariance that's important. What we're going to do now is to look carefully at this fundamental symmetry that's appearing here, which is largely invisible to undergraduates. Because from an undergraduate point of view, as we've talked about already, there's a big difference between the function f of x equals x and the function f of x equals 1 over x. There's not a lot of similarity between those two things. They're very different, they look different, their graphs are different, their integration theories are different, their arc length formulas are completely different, etc. But we're moving away from the calculus point and just looking at this algebraic side of things, and there the symmetry is really important.

An example: here is an integral poly number weighted one minus one, weight of minus one at one, a weight of three at two. It's alpha minus 1, minus alpha plus 3 alpha squared. Here is this reflection symmetry, let's call it sigma. Sigma, and what does this do? Well, it just reflects everything around zero. That tower goes over there, and this little underneath thing goes over on this side, and this thing here goes on the other side.

Algebraically, what we do is we just negate all the exponents, so we're getting three alpha to the minus two, minus alpha to the minus one, plus alpha. More generally, sigma of alpha to the n equals alpha to the minus n, and otherwise, we're  using linearity to extend that to more general poly numbers or I poly numbers. Now this symmetry operation on integral poly numbers satisfies a number of pleasant properties. The first one is that it's an involution, that if you do it twice, you get back to where you started. You reflect and reflect again, you're back to where you are. Sigma of sigma of p equals p.

It's linear, sigma of p plus q equals sigma of p plus sigma of q. It's also linear in the sense that if k is an integer, you multiply a poly number by two and then reflect, well, you're going to get twice the reflection of the original. This one here is a little bit more subtle: that's the sigma of a product is the product of the sigmas. Sigma of pq equals sigma of p times sigma of q. This is a pretty natural algebraic symmetry which is in some sense at the heart of algebra when we look at integral poly numbers in this fashion. For our last slide, we're going to introduce symmetric and alternating integral poly numbers.

We'll say that a poly number, an integral poly number, is symmetric precisely when sigma of p equals p. That means that when you look at it, it's symmetric. Everything to the right looks very much like everything to the left symmetrically. For example, this thing here, 2 times alpha to the minus 3 minus 4 alpha to the minus 1 plus 1 minus 4 alpha plus 2 alpha cubed is symmetric. Conversely, p is alternating, or maybe in some other context, we could say skew-symmetric or anti-symmetric. Let's use alternating when sigma of p equals minus p, same as p bar.

For example, this one here, q equals three alpha to the minus five minus alpha to the minus 1 plus alpha minus 3 alpha to the five, this thing's alternating because when you apply sigma, you're going to get minus 3 alpha to the minus 5 plus alpha inverse minus alpha plus 3 alpha. You're going to get exactly the negative of this thing. Having this sigma reflection allows us to identify two  interesting classes, two particularly natural classes, of integral poly numbers: the symmetric ones and the alternating ones. In fact, there is a nice way of cooking these up in quite great generality. If you have any integral poly number p, then p plus sigma of p is symmetric, whereas p minus sigma of p is alternating. That's an easy check.

Now we're at the door of a  untold chapter of algebra, a missing chapter of algebra that probably you should have learned about in grade nine or grade ten when you were learning about polynomials. But at that time, you thought that polynomials were only things that you cooked up with positive powers of x or y or whatever, but not from this larger point of view: positive powers, negative powers. These things are naturally viewed together. When we do that, we come to this new chapter of algebra, which we're going to start investigating next time, and there will be all kinds of interesting consequences with some actually quite sophisticated mathematics and physics. Hope you'll join me for that. I'm Norman Wildberger.

Thanks for listening. [Music]