# 258 Implication and 16 logical operations

Good day I'm Norman Wildbergers today we're include implication and we're going to expand our or operations and. The the connection between the be something that we'll talk a little bit more. Logic gates which will figure prominently in make some real calculations with both truth tables start is to review. The fundamental operations of Q which we think of as being vectors or elements to. The N I'll write that down because that's sub 2 to the N for. Some n usually I look at N to be thought of as properties of a population ones okay and.

All of this is happening inside the values that P and Q can take on for any given ones and here are. The four possible combinations together and in terms of those here are the those values. So this is how we do the algebra just arithmetic mod 2 with summation and with operators. In boolean algebra and it's almost the which denotes like a join or a Union. In boolean but it's inclusive or so when both P and Q are 1 exclusive or P and Q are 1. Then P plus Q in the operation P and Q which is also sometimes called.

In logic circuit analysis these operations so this is X or this stands for exclusive or as and and. This one's and they're both the same so in terms of their logical names also interest. In a starting point and if we think about it there's because there's four possible inputs to only three since. This one's the same as and ones all together there should be in fact with 4 with 4 elements. So that gives us or connectives so I want to show you all 16 and here. They are there's eight in the top row at them so starting I guess with.

The simplest one and Q going through all possible combinations sort terms of those. All the other ones are expressions have P plus Q and here we have P times Q. So algebra they're arithmetic mod 2 with addition some further ones and along. The first row I've about this the way I've organized it is that these by adding P times Q to each. One of these succession we get P Q P plus P Q Q plus P Q and correct. So for example P plus P Q if we add this so what do.

We get 0 plus 0 0 0 plus 0 is 0 1 plus 1 0 0 and P plus Q plus P Q is 0 1 1 1 there. It is it's in fact just obtained by taking these 8 and right here there's. One okay it's the negation of inverting is a better word and then we're and. The effect of that is just to invert zeros P instead of having 0 0 1 1. We have 1 1 0 0 here 0 1 here's 1 plus PQ is 1 1 1 0 1 plus P plus 1 plus P plus Q plus PQ is 1 0 0 0. Now let's just here so we have all zeros and we have all ones single.

One in them a single one so we look for it single one there a single. One there and any more top and how about pairs of ones there's a pair of over here a pair of ones pair of ones and pair of possible ways of choosing two from four and what where there's a zero. In the top here there's a here is a zero second from the top. So here we're ones to four places so let's have a little bit. The even connectives or operations okay and even think of 0 and 1 as being like even and odd it's is even and 1 is odd. So these all start with 0 up operations or connectives I've just times Q P plus P Q Q plus P Q and P plus Q plus already shown you.

So this is the and operation or operation and these are the standard. The boolean algebra story as opposed to the bool up here but in. The boolean algebra story we have this operation here what we're calling P times Q P plus Q plus PQ. This is the or operation this is ones here so P and Q are. The original of as being the the effect of taking two inputs typically P and Q and. Then there's some output and Q and we're just outputting the first of.

The terms and Q is OT two for original term two now time to to. Some of these connectives or operations so about this later at some point but. We have these these various operations okay and the standard there's this oblong thing like. This with two inputs on the left and one output on the those are. The input propositions then the output input these values and these values then these are about. This is for example if if on the top here we read across here and say ha.

Then the output is there's four possible inputs and for each one of. The or gate shaped a little bit like this it's curved back still. We have two inputs p and an input of 1 and 0 then. We would look down here so this column describes the effect of this gate. This one here the exclusive or almost the same 1 this thing outputs are 0. So the exclusive or is piece to the left there so I haven't said anything have any names for these these are operations story but.

They have a little bit of a different non commutative so all of these operate well not or operations are. All independent of switching P outputs don't change but here that's not going to an asymmetry. This one says that P plus P Q and so there's a little bit of a different aspect of things are and what names. They should have are the even connectives or operations alright these are the eight what. I call odd connectives or I'm allowing both of these names for what these. In two different ways we can think about them as boolean vectors to get another vector.

So they're relationship between two two vectors but we can we're taking one thing and. Then we're adding the which is like arithmetic all right so this is sort. The second row and they're going to be called odd ones and I remind you that these eight are just of. The elements zeros go to one ones go to zero 1 plus Q 1 plus P plus Q 1 plus P times Q 1 plus P PQ. Now it turns out these also have some names these ones here the NAND and nor operations. So the operation here is the and operation this is just and had 0 0 0 1.

This one has 1 1 1 0 and so the one is not or and. This one is not exclusive or I think it's traditional to write this ok. So this the boolean algebra story the the not operation is inversions of P and Q themselves just by adding. This operation not one and not two if we first one and indicates. It or inverts it this was is represented by a bar over the term. So this is our earlier terminology I remind you that just not so that works out and.

We remarked this point they're not standard logic gates in example symbols let's talk about. The logical gate negating a single thing is is this the symbol here circle represents inversion. Now strictly two entries here P and Q but anyway this is the. Logic so I want you to see that and here the three here they're symbols are obtained by taking operations and sticking a little circle. In front inverting so you're taking whatever output the this is the nor gate symbol. So PQ if P is say nor is 0 here is the NAND gate it's like an a a.

So that's a NAND gate and here's the X nor gate of Assassin an X nor gate. So we're talking of rules algebra to that but this is at least to describe these operations at least. Some of the the ones with the red question marks yet all right operations that are a little bit a symmetrical that had question marks underneath them. So they ourselves here is P and Q again and here are these PQ + 1 + Q + PQ. So this one here is the inversion one now it turns out that these also play an that's because. They are basically the implication Stoics and by the Islamic medieval philosophers with an arrow.

So P implies Q or in words if P then just recognize this is really. The same as the and false we have 0 and 1 so if P and Q are both is 1. If P is 1 and Q is 0 this is 0 and if P and except. When P is 1 and Q is 0 when P is on and Q that corresponds with. The stoic interpretation of then Q is false precisely when P is true and. Logic of true and false and we're going to give standing for implication and we'll put a subscript implication that starts with P.

So our input is P then Q as opposed to imp 2 which is. If Q then one it's given by Q implies P now these these two restated. In terms of an or so P implies Q is the let's have a look over here let's look at not P 0 0. So let's look at not P or Q when is that gonna we're taking an or an inclusive or 1 or a 0 is 1 is 0 and 0 or 1 is 1 oh yes indeed. This thing the boolean language as not P or Q crucially the bool algebra addition and similarly Q implies P control well these are just. The inverses of and these are then the negations of these ones so here.

We negate that we get this one and it turns expressions here those are essentially de Morgan's more about boolean algebra. So the four extra ones now see that they are just the implications of going from. One proposition to another and are the bool algebra expressions for those so Q. In the bool algebra that's one plus P plus PQ you that Bulls algebra is powerful enough to not already seen but also to capture. The stoic logic Islamic thinkers okay and I'm going to illustrate chance to illustrate how. We use truth tables to we are ultimately going to do things but.

This is taking a standard course in propositional logic tenets of stoic logic which is modus ponens which. We have P that we're allowed to deduce Q not sure this really is really a valid way of a truth table and filling. It out and verifying with P and Q and we list the various possible values of assignments of 0 &amp; 1 - P and Q and. Then capture so it's a statement of this thing in the Q and here is P and we're supposed to accept. This statement and this statement and there's a and then that combined thing is supposed to imply of modus ponens and. So now if we understand the they work then we can hope to verify.

This thing so to copy the values of P over here as well 0 0 1 and. Now a different color red I'm component this this little statement P or ones. I want to determine whether this thing we know how it works anyway. So 0 implies 0 so if implication when P is 0 and Q is 0. The implication the place where the implication is 0 and P implies previous slide and look under. This this column see that it's a a 1 1 0 1 when P and Q have these is not represented by.

The red one ok and now I'm going to compare this one with. This one and 1 and P is that true or is that 1 or 0 it's false. So much as they are zero or one so if this if this is 1 and. This is 0 it's the same thing 0 if this is 1 and. This is 1 in that case we get okay that represents the cumulative values of of P and Q and. So now we're going to compare this so the final one we'll do.

It in green ok yes does 0 imply 1 yes does 0 plus 0 yes does 0 or 1 value of. The entire expression for all getting 1 all the way down that means that. This and now I want to explain the same computation is something that you don't find. In courses unfortunately with this approach what to pure algebra so everything is going to be. The operations of addition and multiplication and addition and multiplication and then we have to everything is just over. The binary by field ok this thing here which is what we're trying to.

It ok so we're going to convert everything in implies Q well that was not. The actual true bull name was 1 plus P plus PQ that was to take. This and P so what is the bool algebra we have to take. This thing which represents that we'll put that in brackets and I'll leave. This a second ok so let's see what do we get when arithmetic. So this is P plus P squared plus okay implies Q okay I've used.

The fact that things are P around and so we get P squared Q and I'm not associative how do. We simplify this in property of below that in any one of these bulges it's equal to itself that means that P squared is P plus P Q implies Q alright I'll write algebra okay. Now what about this can we simplify important property of the bull algebra. So what we do we write that well we know how an implication to here going from P implies Q. We had to replace here we have to replace this this is equal to 1 is that well that's 1 plus P Q plus P Q squared P Q plus P Q and. Then this is P Q plus PQ any why don't we just calculate.

It we've calculated Q are vectors in a bool algebra you perform or looks like. In boolean algebra form but it can be computation that what you will end up getting. One means that means that no matter where you value 1 on any of. The population objects this is this is a valid argument it's a valid deduction it's always 1. Now I want you to appreciate computation this is pure algebra and it turns just with two propositions but with a lot more polynomial arithmetic really really comes to. The more powerful than the boolean algebra that's we need to rethink circuit analysis and boolean algebra and Bull's algebra.

In this going to give you some more examples of that and algebra as how. It connects with set the area direction I'm.