# 260 Boolean algebra and Shannon's circuit analysis

Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in today's video moving it into important application. In circuit analysis so this is the start of formulation of bool and. Then Vann and Pierce to generated by an understanding circuits and then story today is a little bit novel because at Claude Shannon's original paper and there's you. The basic set up is we're talking about the quite the same boolean algebra. So with the algebra multiplication mod 2 and with the boolean algebra wedge and. The bar ok so in terms of gates this is the not operation.

Now because we consider the reserve the addition and multiplication operations these operations have secondary names also with also. Some variant sums and products P circle some Q and P and Q written as P circle here are. The same will also allow ourselves to elements there terms of alternate notation for on top or a little bit of a twiddle there to denote. The negation these are the boolean algebra and slowly how it developed into. So an important precursor to this development 1904 called sets of independent postulates for. The algebra in a rather abstract fashion so this is mathematics the realization that there's an idea often.

The kinds of things that we study initially widely and that gives us a bigger picture and not obscured by details. So that's what this algebra bool we have these zeros and ones you can just think about. The operations as being what the nature of those operations is the way. He did that he said okay let's start with that K now this thing makes us nervous but for our point of view let's just consider a finite collection of objects that. We know all operations on this collection the first one is a some B. If a and B are in here and the next one is two elements there.

So these are binary operations and they produce another one then there's a unary. It only accepts one object as an input so it one this is. The bar operation and so if d is an we're just going to assume that. We have as Huntington said certain postulates we're going which mimic those that are valid for. The boolean the set and then these two binary operations is a boolean algebra says Huntington. If various ones and not exactly the same way Huntington did set of postulates from which.

He could deduce suggested a number of different possible source we assumed but a. One way or the other we want them we need the commutativity of both. The sum those and then crucially we need distributivity one is the standard. One like a times the second one which is very unfamiliar to us. In set theoretic point of view that a plus B times C special elements zero and. One that have of certain always zero and a times one is always.

One and in a plus a bar is always one and a times a bar do with. The bar what happens if you apply it twice these are properties that ultimately are. We have these properties satisfied then we have a to inquire as to. The nature of these operations the only crucial thing is that they obey these of view towards algebra that became very prominent century and. Then very important in the 20th figure here which is Claude Shannon who lived from a brilliant fellow who not only introduced. The analysis but also went on to found information development in the modern world ok.

So this first analysis of relay and switching circuits this was he wrote. In at MIT and I think it was motivated an undergraduate and making. This connection that class was really very useful for logic circuits had some idea. In this direction he wrote a letter such a thing quite a few decades earlier but. This so we get an important connection between it's a surprise to me to have read. This I've looked at the relevant sections and so it take on things is very unfamiliar.

If you're used electrical engineering and partly this is was were only introduced around 1947. So this is play but also because Shannon sets things up in from what. We would naively think so he's we've got switches like realize that that turn on and there's a gap there and. The gap can associates with this this terminal here a which he calls. The hindrance so the idea is he's flowing here so obstruction same as hindrance there's no hindrance. The hindrance is zero that there the circuit is closed on the other circuit like.

This and current cannot flow then we bit opposite from our usual thinking X current can flow x equals. One means open circuit whether the circuit is on or off it's measuring of getting used to it's quite interesting. So of hindrance and he's interested in analyzing understand how these hindrances combine. So there have with each other they can be in series or things. We have a gap there and we have a gap here there's a hindrance of Y and together that. He says let's call that X circle some Y so the of the hindrances of x and y.

Then the hindrance so I let's have a look at this so if x and y are that these are both closed. The effect of words that the hindrance of this thing will be having a hindrance of. One if one or both of them circuit is not closed cannot have a flow here and. The in the sum okay the other situation is when here's a hindrance of X here's a hindrance of Y. We so we represent that with this other operation then here are the values of that. So if one of words have zero hindrance then the whole thing to flow.

If one of these is zero either hindrance for the product and only. When they're the whole thing will have a hindrance of one so our usual intuition at least my usual intuition on and off mean with regard to electrical circuits connection corresponds to a. Some series some and parallel product in Shannon's original formulation story which is. The complementation or a negation terminal and we do the opposite of whatever. It is open so there will be hindrance of one then hindrance of zero on. The other hand if we have then Y bar has a hindrance of.

One current cannot okay and now Shannon recognizes that this is these operations that. We have going here which that this is the same as these this abstract. So he's in a position now to apply this logic or unfortunately his paper does not reference bool. He references Huntington's paper but in any case the history of 20th century quite different. If he had read Bulls first paper of describing what's going on here or at least nevertheless you can see that it's natural here because these operations are very. The and and the or operations so it's it's not a so here's an example that Shannon looks let's have a look at.

It we see in particular that are appearing in other places so here's W and supposed to interpret. This well the meaning is of simultaneously so you can have a an operator them. We can turn the hindrance of W on or off terminal this terminal and. This terminal all at of one in other words the gate is like open. Then will have a hindrance of zero these will be closed not through here. We have this whole thing convert this into a algebraic expression involving multiplication a circle multiplication.

Now the circle multiplication with just an ordinary to our algebra of cool product okay but we'll keep. The boolean story not the mod - arithmetic of bool here we have a W there. It is there and then this W so it's connected to it with a plus and. Then here there's there's of the the W bar here multiply and this little series here will be a sum of. All of this this is the result of essentially representing here this is X plus Z representing have s plus W bar plus Z representing. This path double plus y plus this little thing which itself s bar with V.

So this whole expression represents now Shannon realizes that because we can apply. The huntington's boolean algebra which Shannon spends can simplify this thing okay and. He the reduction that this same hindrance say X from Z times s bar times V. In other words a situation it's in series then plus y because it's. In series and V and so the effect is that if you build. This an operator who can turn each of the hindrances effect of this circuit and effect of.

This circuit under the same inputs the same choices of whether so you can see. The power of this technology them efficiently through basically algebraic algebra set up by Huntington alright. So what are use to simplify a big expression like the one he's is. This distributive law X plus y times Z is X here because this is. The non-obvious distributive high school and so it takes you a little just. This second distributive law then we have de to express what happens when you take.

The bar so away you have X plus y plus Z plus and. So on things then we're getting the product of the and conversely if. We take a product X Y Z and so sum of all the bars of. The individual hindrances we have these special absorption that X times X plus y is also X again no matter other reduction laws which. I think are that if you have x times some function of x y and is. The same as x times f of 1 comma Y comma Z and replace.

The x value there with just a 1 and X plus some function of x y&amp;z. Then that's equal to with 0 ok let you think about those and. So these for being able to simplify big expressions like we was a course. In electrical engineering a or colleges then we would spend quite a lot of. This boolean algebra framework but my ultimate framework is not really optimal that of Boogle that came before. The boolean algebra and mainstream education so but nevertheless it's fun to play around with boolean certainly important for for set theory right.

So no denying the importance of boolean algebra and analysis we're going to be seeing that. The algebra are some exercises just to play around with so rules that. I just showed you you can show this plus y Z that's the same as X plus y times X plus. This transposition property that if you have XY X bar plus y quite pleasant that's great. In time pass the development of transistors center stage and then happily Shannon's analysis scenario and gives us a wonderful calculus to to that. Next time I'm.