# 261 Transistors, Logic Gates and Boolean algebra

Good day i'm Norman Wildberger today we're and the connection with boolean algebra moving important topic. So the heroes of today's lecture last half-century have really revolutionized that amplifies or switches electronic signals a transistor has three basic aspects there's a. It down here so we want current to flow from the the idea is that a small current through B sends part of. Some larger circuit so there's a little in a larger current allowed to flow from C to e. So there's a here the question is can we have current not a mechanical switch it's an electronic switch and close. We have a this base input B and if we and current can flow and otherwise.

It can't so an original patent that essentially is in the Canadian physicist je Lilienfeld who made a patent. This direction so his work is relatively unknown of discovered and put on. The world stage by these Bratton and William Jacques we who were working with. This transistor so physically a transistor of course but there's a little box up. The top the collector of the base and the emitter and the of. The semiconductors typically silicon so silicon with various substances and then its ability to of dependent on what you've coated with.

So you different kinds of silicon and then this sandwich voltage applied in. The middle to allow voltage can be made very small and they can be combined. Logic gates and then these logic gates themselves very massive boards or integrated circuits. So have millions or even billions of transistors on and physicists have been able to to do. So I think almost at the level of individual electrons like them and naturally you have a billion going to work anyway. So really a remarkable kind ok so a logic gate is a particular combination of end up transforming certain inputs to outputs.

Logic and so very simple examples of such things outputs a so we see a little circuit there's around and here's a transistor there was a base flowing through here. So if this is closed and this transistor will be activated allowing current flow through here there's a a lamp there or. Then this thing here will also light up so it's here this is an inverter it's a little bit more a to a bar. So here if a is closed there's the the in that means the transistor is activated but. Now to go through the lamp anymore the lamp the transistor is no longer functioning there's current is going to have to go through. The lamp so this is inverting a a to a bar with that little circuit diagrams but.

They get a lot more often for simplicity we don't show the entire that's irrelevant to understand what's going on is very important gate which takes two inputs see it's created with these two transistors little resistances here just to make everything and ground here. So generally let's say we both of these are off then both transistors are or no current allowed there and. So then there's fact if one of them is off then there's no way output on. The other hand if we do have both activated and we do have. The potential of getting both inputs are on and in this context zero means switching to. The standard usage of zeros and ones rather inverted to usage in the previous lecture denoted by a product and we're going to reserve.

So that's in keeping with the boolean operation Huntington so here's the aura gate which is parallel. So our voltage source here and then possibility going here and there in parallel and. Then the transistors are activated and current both of them are on but. If they're both often both comes through so we get sees the a or B and. We do our notation that's not standard boolean algebra will consider this to be primary. So they'll this but that's not our point of view our point of sign for.

The mod to operation of bool originally knot of some so our notation is different from. The I'm going to explain to you why bull's original its primary there's. The or gate so we have a configuration of an XOR gate which as you can. We have an output C here and the result is to give us output. When A or B are on but not when both of get some how. We get voltage coming through here not sufficiently electrical engineering oriented you can see that it's more complicated but it's.

Some some nice way and here's our symbol for the reserved the plus sign for. This operation this build it from transistors although admittedly in and now in a similar way. We could also create gate the nor gate the X nor gate so these are. The and the inversion of the XOR gate again here's bit different from. The usual boolean conventions usual gates with a little circle and representing all of these gates. Now can be created using an interesting pair of questions which of these transistors are.

We going to consider as primary work with these things for example we might have B and. Then we hooked up the inputs to various somehow the elemental objects the transistors gates themselves which are. The atomic objects a and B and here's an or gate also in putting. The results of those two and might want to know of gates there is a twentieth-century courses. In electrical engineering on this subject the and and the or gates those three okay. They are all of this store is the boolean algebra the same circuit analysis which was admittedly.

Now there's good reasons for this so first of all are very easy to build with transistors. So it's a primary the other ones are more complicated not reason the other reason is that. The electrical boolean algebra so the boolean algebra was already analysis where we almost have mechanical switches technology and apply. It directly to this situation the same truth tables are appearing here as. They formula is the same algebra is going to apply and this was spectacularly successful not been a more technologically fruitful stream electrical engineering journey that we've seen. In every aspect of the modern world computers mobile it's a it's remarkable and.

The amounts of memory incredibly small machines it's just mind-boggling big ask to question. The validity or the the what I would like to do gently okay. I would like wrong it's it's an incredibly effective but I an even better technology which will simplify. This to use X or and and as the two primary logic gates and to rely on. The algebra of bool the original of foundations for circuit analysis so to convince questions. The engineers are going to be interested logic gate work what kinds of things do you want better.

So I have to justify why it is then we're in our next video.