# 262 How the Algebra of Boole simplifies circuit analysis (I)

[music] good day I'm Norman Wildberger in the algebra of buou simplifies circuit analysis to reorient how electrical engineers are taught mathematics of Bo or Boolean algebra and. The way are the main tasks that we or electrical engineers circuit analysis and. Then I'm going to try to of buou is a simpler and more powerful tool than. This is a very big and bold claim which I'm going there's a lot of vested interest. In the status quo a takes a lot of time to learn Boolean algebra and. So on involved in that and what I'm asking but the advantage is that.

The the new thing that more powerful for most of the applications that's a way. This is a little bit like my campaign with rational trigonometry we have an alternative dramatically simpler and more powerful but. The learning all the little tricks and idiosyncrasies give it up and learn something new even. If that better yes it does take some time and be open-minded because electrical engineers are they're not wedded to a particular ideology and perform calculations and. We can build circuits in way then hey they'll move in that direction. So to start by going through some examples very understanding how how the various manipulations.

In this new or somewhat new algebra of BU system network of gates relatively simple. We have or gate this is an and gate we have two inputs A. So we have a currents coming in here potentially this wire and this wire are connected. So of the Nan gate here and also to this input of the a connection these are just wires that one's on to. This point and there's a node here so it's we could just describe. The effect of this basic Atomic logical Gates in the and so this is a combination of.

This input and entry here is the result of this nand gate which b that's representing what. This gate does giving here this or gate is taking again A and B and it's. This and gate so this is a way of describing the Boolean algebra or or. The algebra bull it's just at the level of the gates themselves as as. We we know is a powerful thing so in this well first of. All this and is a product so and here okay now what about here A nand B that is represented by a product a represents.

The the negation of that so that's a b with a nand Circle sum. So I remind you in this laying out of not a sum itself okay that's. The way Boolean algebra framework in the algebra of BU so it's still. The basic same structure we have a nand b is the inversion of A and B A and B is both both systems but to invert. The and we have of BU we add one so 1+ AB that is. The algebra or B well the fundamental other operation is algebra of BU to capture.

The inclusive ore we have is how you interpret A or B in. The algebra of BU just reminding you here that a plus b that's like an inclusive or and a is. The product That's symbols mean all right let's start our simplifying expression that we're interested. In simplifying we just use ordinary polom arithmetic otherwise of BU point of view okay there's nothing special student doesn't already know how to do we're just or algebra what do. We get so 1 * this is plus AB a okay and now. We use the commutative A plus b plus a b and this is.

Then a 2 B and this crucial property that x^2 = x that's. One of bu's powerful that we can drop the powers of things so as B and. This is the same as a so this whole thing and now we use. The other important identity of BU anything it's the same as having Z of that thing AB plus. This AB is zero this AB plus this AB is and four is also equal to zero because it's 2 * 2 get a plus b which. We recognize as the standard two basic operations in the algebra of BU.

So that it's effectively just the same as the x or derivation of. The simplification of this little now same analysis but with Boolean algebra Boolean algebra story. So AB bar that's the nand product is an and okay how do. We simplify this these various identities that were and Ben and de Morgan and others. In fact the de take the product AB bar and replace it with a bar. This sum okay now we can use the distributive law replace this with a bar a plus a bar B plus b Circle pluses.

Now what happens well this a bar is 0 and if you have 0 plus something well that's basically drops off. This basically drops off and plus b bar a and that's a simplified form than that. So now we have to identify well what connective is that well Let's just go back and b. The four possible values for that Kim okay and here's a bar B which is. The inversion of one when picked up there and here's B Bar a. So we we get a single one there and then when when we just taking.

The or of these two so we get 0 1 1 plus b bar a is. In fact our standard xor gate for the for the algebra of BU analysis but of a a second possibility here. So when we were end result well because it's a sum of products. We typically like to reduce s of polinomial the number of terms and write things like here it's quite parallel to. This one thing here we can let's have a look at this because. It has the same a product here with a sum in between them product.

In between them so in terms of numbers answer instead of being a sum of products. This situation the sum and the product operation of dual relationship because the demorgan's other just by taking a bar. So with the bar we so there's a a symmetry there so it's prefer. This as the answer or whether we prefer little ambiguity that's present in. This Boolean algebra of buou and that will play an important this example illustrates a first main task going to be want to be doing with. Logic gates we of gates to a canonical form so we have some big who knows what and there might be dozens or inputs might be very complicated and.

We want to effectively the same as this much smaller more is a clearly a main objective and. So to experience and also touch base with an important let's have a look at. This example now it's still relatively Elementary only two inputs we have a sending a signal here and also here. One here whatever it is outputting that output is Gates and then the result of these two is put want to know what is. This thing here we haven't really introduced any algebra at this large scale thing is that. This is a nand it's a that's representing here right this is a nand of.

This nand so it's the result that we get from we're getting a but also Nan because. This is a getting here well it's the result of this thing a nand b and we're nanding that with. The a coming the input here okay the bottom part which is between. The same output that we had here which coming in there so Nan B. So that's a logic gate of by Gates does so let's first simplify. This with nan B in the algebra of BU world is 1 + a.

So AB is inverting it here's again the thing that the algebra po. So what's in this this nand one plus the product of this thing and. This thing bracket this bracket represents what's inside is an a nand something else. So that's a one plus well that's a n b which is 1 + a. So this bracket this one and this one is represented by so it's and. This A and B there's again 1+ a b and multiply only need to know how to do polinomial arithmetic that.

In high school so we expand what's 2 okay now we could go ahead and expand. This that we always have at our disposal these two and x^2 is always X it's always those two. So this B so it makes sense for us to just simplify it at. So we could just expand this out and doing this with pen and paper it's probably more have 1 + 1 + a + a b * 1 + B + a b. So we have to is 1 + B + a b a *. All of this is a + a b + a 2 after we rearrange a 2 b^ 2 that a b * that a is have to remind ourselves that x + x is zero.

So this 1 + 1 is two it's gone we have a b and. We have an AB and here's another ab and what about the same as a. So that's another a so we've got four here's another one that's five and. This is is B so this is just another AB so Al together. We is equal to zero right so any even number is get a plus b and. We recognize that's the exor gate as we did in the first example even though got Nan Gates and it's configured differently that.

We started with which is essentially just a a bar there's the expression that we're of Boolean algebra. So we'll concentrate on this take this big thing and multiply it by. This big is this thing here this is an a nand a nand b. This a with this thing this is AB bar and we have a nan you take. The product and then you put a bar first product okay that was that. One and then this so we have to take the product of this thing take a bar of.

All of that that's that thing there which is that thing there including that small bar. This thing here including that bigger bar and a big bar that goes over. The whole product so around that looks a bit intimidating but of in involution that X bar bar equals x. Then we that well first of all this is a a bar of a tells us that that's. The same as a bar circle ingredient and take its bar and we're going to take. The bar of what's in involved here including is just the original so.

This is just the same as involved here including that bar and we take its cancel and. We just get a bar * B now we a bar we could write that as a bar plus bar bar here is a bar circle plus b bar still multiplied bar plus a b bar that's. All on the left hand side we're taking a plus of all of those. Now matter and we remember that a * a bar is going the effect of. This and this is going to be zero going to just disappear and we're just going to that's essentially. The same thing as the exor verify that this combination of four and N Gates we're touching base here.

Now with an interesting namely that these two gates the nand gate and. The and this is an or gate with an inverter these only had nand Gates you had a big bucket and. This analysis because each of the other Gates can Gates and the same is true for. The or the nor so if you had a big bucket of nor Gates you could other Gates appearing as a combinations of nor. This and if you're an electrical engineering with doing something like this to demonstrate and just from nor Gates we've made. Some the problem is how do we reduce or simplify a we've seen that.

The kinds of things that we're little bit different in the algebra bu story become even more pronounced. When we move from two variables so we're going to have to have a forms that a circuit can end up being reduced be moving to towards seeing more and more clearly more powerful and conceptually just a lot exciting. I hope you're going to join me for that.