# 263 Canonical forms for logic circuits

Good day I'm Norman Wildbergers and today we're circuits what we want to do is. We want to be able algebraic representation of it that contains with respect to inputs and outputs and. We want first of all with the algebra of bool which I'm far superior for circuit analysis and with that's currently taught. In engineering courses think about moving from this scenario to this framework for example here is a circuit an and there's an and there's an or. We have two these inputs and give us an output C and we'd of these frameworks and we've seen that. In the expression A plus B so this output is just the sum mod two of a and B while.

In the boolean algebra more complicated it's really an XOR gate but this a B bar circle. Some a Barbie or by a circle some of equivalent symmetrically different but dual idea is that we've got. This complicated possibly of gates and we want to find canonical forms that dispense with. The detail that don't tell you just tell you effectively what this combination well for us typically only. One output okay that's is the situation where we have two inputs say a basically sixteen connectives or operations want to have a look at at that again but. Now both point of view so let's start with the even one so here.

They are and what we see is the inputs a and ways of assigning zeros and ones to them and. Then a B and then B plus a B and a plus B plus a B. Now expressions for the same connectives so with the like this but we also have. This negation and we to this ordinary plus which is really like in gate. Then is described in either of these two that's the same this thing here is a times B bar sum B. This is the usual inclusive or operation on canonical forms so if we're interested.

In a gate then the algebra bull expression and the boolean same but. If we're looking at this one here then the boolean algebra describes it are different here where here there's an A plus B. In here the other eight connectives or operations we've are the a and B are no longer visible but here B. In the algebra bool the inverse is obtained is just to add one to. All the previous ones in the zeros with ones and the ones with zeros algebra names for. The same thing now we get some a product and over here this is.

The the X nor the xnor gate one plus a plus B b bar or a circle. Some b bar times a bar sort these sixteen exhaust all the possibilities for you have any circuit combination of gates no inputs a and B. Then effectively it's going to be we can think about generalizing that have more than two inputs. Then we get something anymore or connectors they're just role in circuit analysis. So we just want to shift these sixteen connectives or operations so they are functions from b2 squared - B - where b arithmetic 'el framework that everything is built two tuples of Byfield objects. So b1 b2 ordered a two-dimensional bool algebra ok and we can think takes these things and gives us elements.

In the here the four possibilities and we choose one of 0 1 0. So we can think about that now as being of ordered pairs 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 and these ordered a two-dimensional square and. The the vectors 0 here is 1 1 and these values are telling us value at 0 0 is 0. The value at 0 1 is 0 there's associated a value of 1 there. It is there and 0 so geometrically what a boolean function is is. In this square more generally cube or hypercube algebra bool expression for this function like boolean algebra canonical form for.

It a times take this and generalize it extend it so from B 2 to. The n to be 2 for N equals 1 to 3 or it. The dimension of F the dimension of F in the dimension is simpler. I get Brecon ok so let's look N equals 1 so dimension 1. In that case a boolean there are then exactly 4 boolean functions of. This have one element in our vector in our input vector only have.

The value 0 or 1 so the question is one function is 0 0 another is 0 1 another is 1 1. The algebra of bool this is the zero function this has the same values as. The input and this is one algebra bull in the boolean algebra framework. The a 1 and a bar right in the boolean algebra we have but. We are able to add one so exactly for boolean interesting case so any. Logic gate that we build four boolean functions so to illustrate that let's gates well here here's a NAND gate here's an and a.

So the input a is arriving here and then it's this inverter it's like a not operation and. So let's have a look at what the output say X is 1. So let's ask ourselves what happens if we set a this NAND gates well there'll be 0 0. So I remind 0 is 0 so if we negate that we're going to have what about down here. So 0 coming in here that's of 1 at the top here while. The bottom one here is an exclusive or on that exclusive or so 1 or 0 is on.

The top and one at the bottom and this is an is 0. Now what if the input is 1 we have the 1 and the 1. This is a NAND gate so if we take 0 so now there's 0 coming. In there ok what about be a 0 coming in there and one coming. In there so we'll still have one coming through here so the top and. Now we have one coming in the bottom 1 that's 0 output of 0 let's look at.

This from a an expression for it let's let's write this like bool calculation because that's what I'm trying would write. This expression out so we've got two an ant and it's like multiplication and what are here. This is an and what is an and in the algebra a times a that is. The NAND the effect of this NAND an ad with to multiply that by. The output of this this is an xor gate xor is just addition. In the well this is an inverter so we have the inverse of there and here.

The input is a so we have to add a a in the algebra bool. So this is 1 plus a and ok is 1 plus a plus a but a plus a is always 0. So we pay that is indeed what we got over here this is. It so it's really really operationally the same it dispenses with the details and just gives. In terms of what happens to the inputs to create because we only have. One input a but now we want fashions where there's more than just.

One or two now we're considering boolean functions which take well so here are our three inputs they're going possible ways of assigning zeros and ones to these two way. So eight ways altogether and we can list numbers from zero to seven. In binary that's zero canonical way of orienting or organizing those have now what is a boolean function a boolean. One of these rows and outputs either a 0 or 1 ones so that's our B 2 cubed. So that's an element altogether the eight elements of B 2 cubed form these eight things there is 0 0 0 that's like. The 0 1 1 here we are yes 1 0 0 they're 1 0 1 there doing.

When we're creating a boolean function is vertices like this this is an example of f. It has the values 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 so. This is there is 2 times 2 times 2 times 2 times 2 times 2 of assigning zeros and ones to these eight geometrically is assigning zeros and ones gets. The value 0 0 1 0 gets the value 0 whereas that's up here. It gets the value 1 1 0 0 gets the and 1 1 0 gets a 1 1 1 0 that gets a 1 and 1 1 an assignment of zeros and ones to. The vertices about it ok I want you to think about this as.

The by field to the vertices of this cube and them ok now. The connection with Serkis well this we build we build a big logic gate circuit of man Norwex doors and knee gaiters whatever combination of gates is such that. When we put in here in this column this is the the form we've dispensed with. The detail of what gates by just looking at the effect what it does. It another way if you have three inputs there gates that you could build 256 no more no less any to be. One of those 256 different possible outputs we express this boolean function f algebraically more succinct canonical way of expressing.

It I've just copied it here here the eight different the values corresponding F and. We want to express of doing this there's two simple ways of what. We do is we concentrate on the places where places in this case here and. We just look at these the boolean algebra point of view so this is courses. So what do you do well you look at each going to contribute a term. In some that term is of either the inputs or possibly their negations us that.

This value of 1 occurs precisely when a 0 and we express that by writing a bar b Bar C bar is off that's. The bar that will result in a 1 if a 0 so the only way. This product can be 1 is if of the end operation an and is most of. The times are in themselves 1 the only way to make ingredients are. One which is effectively saying this first possible one that we're getting there bar BC because there's a zero. In the a place and are saying this will be 1 precisely when a is here.

We get an a B C bar this will be 1 precisely song because. The way we can get a 1 is either this algebra expression for. This boolean function f to wait a minute but there are all these ways know that. This thing doesn't simplify and give us question that's a very good question and. It turns is as good as it gets but that's just because of here about general how do whether what have to talk about that a little bit later okay thing we're still looking each. One of these rows pool notation so instead of a bar b Bar C bar.

We when a B and C are all 0 and otherwise it's going and. Then we're gonna take a sum so we did this difference well here there's a circle. So I'm here no way that that one of these can be 1 and. The then this one's not going to be 1 this one's not doesn't matter whether there's a circle row over here is described by a 1 plus a B and C we're working. In the algebra pool which is just that it's a little bit simpler because. We have we can okay but we just start by expanding so do.

We get we get one so if you expand this thing terms a b b c AC and that'll be. The cubic term 2 times 2 times 2 that's 8 possible terms 1 2 3 get by expanding that first thing and. Then here you get a B+ ABC okay but now this is the algebra that whenever you have two of anything that's. The we we have we have a 1 we have a plus B plus C an a/b there as well. So there's two of them so another BC there's to be seasons they disappear. It stays and the last term's are the ABC there's altogether there are three ABCs but three times ABC is 0.

So we just get plus ABC so this is then a the canonical form. In the algebra pool for this form it's got a solid red thing over. It this all of the terms none of them appear with higher always reduce but. So it's not going to happen that particular boolean function but there's inverse a pro. The same question so I've repeated 0 1 0 and now what we want to do is. We want to than 1 so there's 5 of them that row that row that.

This boolean function by looking at those rows with the boolean algebra story. This function is values of zeroes exactly at these spots so when thing here. When a is 0 B is 0 and C is 1 that's is on. When all of these conditions are met and to have an output of 1. So to get an output of 0 we a big bar over the whole thing okay because we're we've got. This element here for this this a down here a B Bar C bar expresses that row a B.

If any one of these conditions are satisfied then will be 0 the in-suite inside. The bracket there to get a 0 that will then correspond to exactly a little bit complicated looking at. This bar on another expression using the DeMorgan law okay bar of that that's. The same as the product of the the product and here a bunch of products of. The of something like this well the other DeMorgan sum circle some of. The corresponding bars so if to get a circle some B circle some C bar a b bar goes to b c goes to c bar and we've taken.

One of five similar products one for each one of but it's quite complicated and. It has a lot of not the optimal one in fact the one that. We got don't want this to be a canonical form so there's here but that would involve us utilizing. It now that can be done but I just want to point stage a canonical form that's that's particularly done to get something that's really canonical on story where. We basically do the same blue so instead of having a bar b Bar C. We have term there 1 plus a B 1 plus C and then here a.

All of that and then we have to negate the whole is adding 1 to. It so that we're adding 1 at the just expand everything out we expand. The to there then we add these ones we get a B and C and a plus ABC and here. We get an A C plus a b still have to fir to add. One at the end ok does a 1 a B and C those are. The only linear terms that occur there's another one there's a third one.

So occurs once there once there BC BC BC that's what's the other. One AC AC is where there's an two of them so we've already done AC. So the other there it is an a B and there's another second a and finally a B C's there's. One there one there that simplifies to a single AC BC so we get entirely surprisingly. We get exactly the same we're getting the same canonical form it really. Now why are these two methods both useful well lots and lots of inputs.

So this column your boolean function had just a few ones that you use. The technique on the previous slide on a few zeroes then you would want to look at. It on the places where it's zero so both of these that in. The algebra bull situation they give you typically you don't get the same thing you get. The other way you get a product of sums so we'll this dichotomy of canonical expressions don't see with. The far superior algebra of bool this but clearly we need to think a little bit.

The algebra bool what kinds of expressions are very naturally with just ordinary polynomial even simplified because of. The wonderful mod 2 algebra and we're going to explain that give join me for that I'm Norman Wildberger.