# 264 Boole polynumbers and equivalent circuits

Good day I'm Norman Wildbergers today we're going types of Polly numbers algebraic expressions. In of encode the effects of electronic circuits made looking at last time. We were thinking about three function in this situation so the eight possible zero zero. One zero zero one zero and we saw that bool by this particular like a polynomial or poly and circle sums. In this fashion and so I need to of bool is primary so we're going to reserve. The which is specifically addition mod 2 ok that's sign is the inclusive or.

This is exclusive or of ingredient here is an actual logic circuit create. One like this more or less directly just converting the operations here either addition that that represent them. So in the algebra bool that's not gate there and the multiplication is can be interpreted as follows here are inputs a like a constant constant circuit that's just taking. The one plus a and feeding them through B plus C that's the result of. This gate here and here is the result of taking an XOR on them AC there's an and gate representing. The product and is to take the output of the AC that we've had and there modulus and here will result.

In a plus ABC and C with there's AC coming out of there with that and. Then finally the ABC is added on to that boolean function there it is right there it's F that can be established with these eight different on. The other hand in the algebra bool here's the logic diagram that captures a situation. So these situation that electrical engineers have to become the other to how to convert from. This to a gate or to a gate or from the expression to a truth table courses. This is all done in the context of that we're making primer is almost not mentioned is we're trying to position.

The algebra of bool connection between boolean functions like this this and various. Logic circuits that represent to have more experience and understanding what poly numbers and. The boolean algebra and we'll be whether two circuits are in fact equivalent. So these are some data structure points of view the difficulty in defining what a variable is expression. In a variable X or in a variable Zen or tricky saying what exactly a variable is. So in the like this a poly number is a column of numbers there's their sum which is just component wise.

One is 1 times 2 the next one is 3 times 2 plus times minus 1 and. The next one is 0 times 2 plus introduce something that's a little bit like a to be. This particular Pauline umber 0 1 in which can write say P as 1 plus 3 alpha plus 2 alpha of. The X usually but now if we are asked what is Pauline umber. So the role of a variable disappears the two-dimensional story it's a something similar directions. So it's a two-dimensional array one one that's s the sum is just component wise and.

One way of understanding that is just to convert introduce alpha as well as before but. Now one then alpha squared will be as before but beta combinations like alpha and beta are possible those things. So this thing here would be 1 plus 2 beta squared and then you can check that. If you just thinking of alpha and beta as variables just writing it down. All the coefficients all at poly numbers here just one variable by poly higher dimensions also. So for example if we go to gamma correspond to three dimensional arrays and is a poly number.

In alpha beta and gamma and the whole thing is dictated by those coefficients and on a three dimensional lattice. In this not very big so if here's the origin and here say gamma direction. Now then this cube represents are either zero or one and we see that. The assignment of numbers to the various positions 1 minus 5 and a 1/4 that alpha beta gamma term. So willing to consider higher dimensional we can extend this to higher dimensional dimensional. One will will suffice that's talking about in this series and now we want going to.

This by field that means we want to the coefficients now not as being integers. So integers and not poly rat where the coefficients where the coefficients come from. The by field be sense that's a much simpler situation and we might poly int poly rat. Now we have poly be 2 okay and to say a little bit about sazon it's at. Some level the difference is a a simplicity the arithmetic here is just. So much simpler in ok so all those is quite Elementary there's a precisely what's happening.

I want to show you in B - there are only two operations there's and multiplication mod - with zeros and ones okay Polly numbers and for specific. This let's consider and gamma and let's just choose rather arbitrarily gamma Q is beta plus beta gamma and R is 1 plus really are. In Polly b2 because the coefficients how do we do arithmetic with these things. The arithmetic mod 2 so P plus Q we get a 1 we gamma. We add them all up what about P and R well there's no constant term. We have an alpha we have now what about Q plus R well there'll be a 1 but.

The boolean world X plus X is always 0 whenever plus 0 plus gamma squared and there's. The beta just P times Q so here's 1 plus alpha plus gamma them well. We just use the distributive law so 1 is alpha beta plus alpha beta gamma gamma x. This a bit of simplification because there's a beta so those two will cancel we'll just be left with. This one is beta gamma squared so the arithmetic the same as doing integer arithmetic with polly reduced mod 2. So even coefficients even integers simpler arithmetic for sure because of this much only has two elements.

Now Polly numbers are not have learned that a polynomial is a function of a about things a politic number is an expression of as a function. We can make it act as a function that R is 1 plus beta plus gamma squared. So so everything has coefficients 0 and 1 so let's at 1 0 1 because it's a try poly number and gamma equals 1. So we'll get 1 plus 0 plus 1 substitute or evaluate it at these 3 numbers. We there's no alpha no problem beta is 1 gamma is 1 out to be. One if we evaluate it at 1 1 1 then we consider this closely related but distinct Pauli.

The same except that there's not a gamma square that this thing here will evaluate on these get 0 1 and 1. In fact we can see that it's going because of the fact that x squared is always X about. The arithmetic in his framework that x you apply gamma squared to anything it's. The are equal as functions though they are distinct as because they're just not. The same lists the one in a different place so there are different poly is something that's a new phenomena that you see with. The rational numbers or the integers okay that you've got these two Pauline umbers which identical that doesn't happen over.

The rational are different they are going to act differently able to find something that. They act differently us to separate in our minds very clearly the idea. They are separate things and this difference is or by field situation same thing happens over have to be very aware of. It has major eventually explain my algebra calculus course now numbers and their role as functions motivates which is a subtle distinction there almost to be. The ones that play the important role for bool poly number what is. It it's a poly number with coefficient 0 1 and there's only plus signs B capital C instead of alpha beta and gamma and greater than 1 no power greater than 1.

So for this before 1 plus a plus B plus C plus AC plus of any. One of these variables that are appearing see in fact so you don't see any Squared's you other hand. This thing here is C which is a plus B because that a there has an exponent of 2 poly numbers but to to make. It clear that we're ones we're going to switch from alpha betas and and. So on and let's introduce this type so poly as opposed to poly P -. Now a theorem unique bool poly number P tilde such that P and equals P tilde of X for any X.

In B 2 to the N any so in other words given any poly number there. All the powers are at most one which acts just the the idea of having a function as functions these. The theorem with an example which will also show original so let's suppose that we're. In dimension is a try poly number P which is 1 plus beta plus plus alpha squared gamma to. The fifth okay now a b and c so each of these is 0 or 1 and we're. The alphas with a's the betas with bees and the B squared plus BC cubed plus B squared C v.

Now the crucial property of bool that x squared equals B we can replace. This C cubed with C because if equal to C because C cubed is C squared times C. One of these numbers is going to be originally is whole thing becomes BC and. This one becomes B C we get to rub off all the exponents and. Now there further reduction that can happen because we can seized so they disappear and. They disappear we're P tilde and this P act exactly the same way on inputs even though.

The actual objects the poly this one has all kinds of higher power terms. This that does not happen with rational or integer so it doesn't make sense to define. This over the field or over a by field it does make sense okay. If we're interested in functions we can restrict poly number as a function is effectively. The same bool poly numbers are a manageable cohort because the theorem that there are exact to to. The two to exactly 2 to the 8 so it's 256 and why is that be of.

This form it'll be some coefficient times 1 B plus something times C plus. So many times a B plus something times ABC the possible terms that at most to. The first power is really exactly the are basically listing all the subsets of eight possible blanks to be filled. In with each 2 times 2 times 2 times 2 times 2 times 2 times numbers. When we have 3 inputs or dimension 3 ok poly number probably better to be an expression and. Then it's made of B 2 linear combinations subsets of 1 through n.

So if we choose a subset I that subset we can create a term. The product will then be a constituent 1 of 2 to the n such general boola Polly number. In this dimension and there are going to be exactly then two to. The will be two to the two to the n bool Polly numbers. The same as the number of boolean functions of dimension n we might say Polly bull and okay that n is three those are. The ones but you're talking that brings together these two central objects in of dimension N and.

The bull Polly numbers of number evaluation theorem it asserts that these numbers of dimension n isomorphic to. The boolean what sense well it's quite a strong bull so what does. This mean so it means at least function f so I remind you what a boolean function be to it's a function on n tuples of zeros from. The bull algebra signing each element the a function f we then get an a unique bool poly. The property that if evaluate F on an n-tuple a 1 poly number B sub F at a 1 a 2 up to a n where. The to our by field so this is this is great so for a unique bull poly number okay and.

This this matching that respects the linear structure and well and so it tells us that. This B sub F this any circuit which has output F because these. So we have some complicated circuit we make a that truth table that we've made that's a boolean. We can represent that boolean function by a bull will represent that particular function and. So function will be associated to the same bool poly of bulls algebra of. The algebra of bool to deal correspondence between circuits truth tables with a nice little example and.

I chose an example or instead chow ski and I'll put a link to. It down she can and we have inputs a B and C and here's a of a B and C. So let's analyze it so we here we have a couple of ends and. We have an or so what's a bar here she works in the boolean framework. So the inverter is one plus a so we have one plus a and B that's a product and. Then that's ANDed the output here is this first term here and then.

The circle sum and what's happening here is we're there and this is also a here. So 1 plus B times algebra bool so we have to convert the inclusive sign of. The algebra book so how do we do that y plus the product XY okay X plus y plus X Y. So have to add one plus B times a and we also have there and 1 plus ba there ok. We expand we get a common factor of ABC a multiplied by 1 plus a 1 here. It is not boolean algebra we're just using numbers okay but now this simplifies a little a/b there's a BC there's an ABC they're fine and that by anything.

The only effect will be to jack algebra bull a squared is the same as a b cubed that we're multiplying by will have. The effect of be four copies of ABC and since 4 is the same as plus BC plus ABC and. This is a boule Polly number is now unique it's it's unique there's only. One Polly number that the theorem guarantees will we know how to create. This thing right we I told you this before if we can look at. The create a corresponding sum of products for that actual truth table how do.

We do that well this is input different values of a B and C. If they're all C is 1 but the others are 0 we're going to get will be 0. If B and C are 1 that's 0 that'll be a a is 1. The others are 0 that'll be 0 0 0 so we'll us a 1 that's 0 that's 0 that's 0 let's looking that'll be a. One so we'll get zero and when all 0 so that's what we pick up which is. The same analysis so we're starting to see here the reason all there is a unique bool polynomial or bool table and.

This isn't invariant so we can tell when corresponding bool poly numbers and there is of those things are equal because you just look at have exactly. The same coefficients and otherwise headache trying to decide whether this boolean this is a very very hard problem okay it's like do not need that. We are just evaluating we get just whether this polynomial is the same as. This of creating a truth table as a result that's just in this case just reduce. It mod two at the end with the algebra pool point of view. So next time of problems that electrical engineers want to it I've Norman.