# 265 How the Algebra of Boole simplifies circuit analysis (II)

Good day i'm norman Wildberger in today's video helps us to rethink teaching electrical engineers effective replacement for. The usual boolean at universities all around the world so if you're somewhere around. The world you can think about way for students to learn how to do circuit last time was. This correspondence between a truth table representing a boolean function required function that. We want to output depending called F values 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 on our source. This bool poly number it's a poly number it's an particular property that no exponent is bigger okay and try to convince you that there's an exact these bull poly numbers and here's a.

This boolean function and takes the inputs a B and are the logic gate equivalent of. The operations here is like an and and the addition here is the an xor gate. So here we have 1 plus a that's the there's B see this xor gate is taking B plus C. So cumulative effect of this is output right there being output there and. When we add this to this thing here this further and gate is taking. The the B so this is ABC being output here and when another XOR gate we're effectively adding.

All of this circuit is a representation of this bool poly problems involving circuit analysis where. We so here are the three main logic gates in the and the or operation corresponding to. The XOR standard symbols for those used in electrical all possibilities 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 and. The sum of adding these 2 mod 2 0 1 1 and crucially 0 here 1 and here a little bit more complicated. The usual the exclusive or by having a 1 here ok and it's A plus B plus a B basically. The sum of these two to remember that the or gate is represented have a separate operation.

We use the circle some it's a little bit simpler to write than. This okay algebra point of view but it's very important to the boolean algebra point of view because for. One is secondary okay in a boolean algebra course primary and this one is considered secondary. So usually this operation gets the plus sign and important that we distinguish our notation here 2 operation and. This circle some represents this we're going to be focusing on the algebra bulan multiplication law 2 because there everything is simple. Now there are three other important of the ones I've just shown you here are we're inverting.

The three main gates and in the you add one to zero you get. One if you add one and one around this one one plus a plus is X or represented diagrammatically with an xor negation logically. It probably would be better more consistent with the other names having the N gate here is. The negation of the and gate which the a be representing the and. So one plus a B has an and gate with a negation little circle after and. We just take the or expression A plus B plus gate was 0 1 1 1 we're just negating.

It all the symbol for it is the symbol for the or gate with connect with. The more traditional boolean putting bars over things ok so this would be for. The or gate so the negation would be putting because of the DeMorgan laws. This could also be over here negating the and the involves a bar using. The DeMorgan as a bar circle some b bar these things as secondary ok. We prefer not in fact we're doing from the usual boolean algebra story with.

The usual story okay we're gonna try to stick or inversion just amounts to adding. One so we these three here and those six gates altogether create electronic circuits. So now we can analyze alright so for our first problem let's analyze and an output H and let's determine. The output H three gates involved and here's a NAND gate and can refer to. The outputs of these two gates as evaluating what's going on with the whole picture. So it has input a and the other input is this B is an a NAND B that's a a description to replace.

This with something algebraic so we is 1 plus a B alright a B that's. The product the negation of the adds that's the NAND so X is is an or gate also with input a coming here and nor is. The negation of the or the or is a plus B okay and. Then H the final output that we're really here and we have to remember what. The or gate is plus the product X Y ok so now we can put these. So this is going to be what the X is 1 plus AP B.

So there's the Y and we also have to add the x we have to evaluate. This polynomial in a and B and that will be the effect of. This circuit on the I've copied what we have already obtained for using polynomial algebra like you learned. In and then we copy this 1 plus a plus B plus st. There's 1 plus a b times. All this we'll use the this so we just repeat it again repeat.

This one this a b times 1 there's a be what's a b times a is. The same as a in the algebra pool so this is a b and a b times a b would be a squared times b. Now we use the other important simplify aspect anything they cancel it's gone. So one plus one is so this term here being exactly the same as. This combine to give zero so we have a 1 plus a b from and. This a b cancel and this a b and this a be which.

We recognize is exactly equivalent to a nand circuit that we had is effectively equivalent gate a b nand to create a ch ok. So we've been just by doing the simplification but crucially new complicated boolean algebra facility with two simplifying properties property that x is 0 and that x squared is. The same as x in basically you're allowed to rub off exponents of 9 polynomial algebra ok and it's exactly what's remarkably yes it's a remarkable thing people have original insight of bool has been basically go back and really apply rules original insight output m of. This circuit which has inputs a b a nand gate there's an or gate there's an and gate outputs of these various gates. So let's call the gate y the output of this and gate zed. So these out what the total effect is alright let's look a and b well that's 1 plus ap why is an or gate.

This is a or b which we know is a plus b plus and it's an and gate. So that's x and y well and the product so it's just x times y there's x need to expand that out just polynomial arithmetic times. All of this is a plus b plus a b and then that down longhand here. So here's an a b squared b squared ok now we can simplify. This in same as a b let the a squared is the same as a b and similarly. This is a b so how many b's they cancel one there and.

One there they cancel have a plus b that's what zetas and finally m is input c. So it said xor see in the algebra rule addition all right that's. The addition mod to just a plus b plus c that's the answer that's a it's a polynomial expression. In the inputs with unique that's the beauty of it there's no other plus b plus c. If you do this correctly all right bit more complicated circuit with one two three. We want to determine the output end here in terms that the nand gate is a a universal gate involving nand gate.

So if you have the big pile of any other circuit so this is an example of happening algebraically here are. The there y output there zetas put there are w output them individually. The x here is the result of an is one plus a b. The y here is an and between the an and between there's an a coming. In here and a/c that's an and between x and y so it's. One plus so this is one plus one plus a b times one plus.

This out we're going to get a one and that one is there. So 1 plus 1 is 0 we'll also get an a b and. I think what shouldn't it be a b square c well get just abc as. The output there that's zent and nand gate is being used with two identical inputs to here and to here. So this w is zhen nan zi which squared is the same as. It so this is the same taking the input z in both inputs is effectively right.

So this is like a not operation we have w there and now. We can finally get what between this w and this u so it's 1 plus w you is 1 plus ac right there and. The the w is 1 plus bc plus abc that's not an expression for n just. In the intermediate things x y z and so on so now we circuit is really doing. So i've copied it again so now we're expand this is a 1 here let's take abc and let's also add. The product of ac times b is abc originally a squared b c but a squared.

We get another abc abc squared but the by this well we get another abc because rubbed off and. We just get abc ok now we look cancel the a b is there. The bc is there this abc abc and we still have an ac there. The result we've got a bull poly number as an output this is poly number property namely that. All the exponents like to show that in fact this output a b plus bc circle. Some ac so for this particular combination or gates the result happens to be.

The same great a very important practical problem which is to to replace. It with something algebraic and we're as a result in our next video we're going to go to look at different circuits seemingly different effectively. The same that's another to learn how to do.