# 266 How the Algebra of Boole simplifies circuit analysis (III)

[music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in today's algebra rule is such an effective replacement for to analyze circuits a very important topic. In so this is now an alternative framework to the all around the world. So I'm presenting a really much simpler but it's really going back to. The following fundamental question today when are going to take the two circuits and draw truth circuits. In terms of all possible inputs rather number that represents each of the circuits and have. The same outputs with the same inputs are the same for example here are two a and B and let's express.

The output in terms here's an XOR gate which corresponds to just we adding well. The input here is a not a because a and here we have B. Now in the algebra bool obtained by adding one we're working mod two. The input on this side on the top here is one what are. We doing we're taking some of those the algebra pool so it's one plus a plus B canonical bool poly number that represents. This a and not B or one plus B so how do you express a.

The NAND gate outputs 1 plus C times D it's like ok so. We have to take 1 plus the product of the and the other input which is. The inversion of out what do we get we get 1 plus a plus a B okay there is. The bool poly number for this circuit are at them as polynomials polynomials. In a and B same as that polynomial it is not they're not okay very simple and today we're going to be getting experience working with gates converting of ball. So in boolean algebra approaches this equivalent is quite subtle in fact in general not a unique way of representing a of taking.

One boolean expression and transforming and there's a whole range of them into something you could have these two expressions which are other is a subtle art. Now in engineering it takes quite a lot of experience but for us it's difficulty here because. In the algebra Buhl this process requiring no trickery or no cleverness nine polynomial algebra simplified okay and. The which capture the circuits are always unique okay algebra bool and the boolean algebra. If you're okay has huge consequences all right so we're to solve problems directly and you can follow first problem is show that these two circuits are here. We have a B we have inverters there and then what is X well that's a NAND gate inputs a and B is an or gate with.

The inputs 1 plus a + 1 plus B it's what we might call. The circle addition so I'm takes a - 1 plus a the universe dear takes B - 1 a circle sum between those two things okay what is bool with just a regular sum and multiplication plus. The second one one plus B plus the product there okay the first. One plus the second one plus that out well the one plus one is zero. We get an get we get a 1 plus a plus B plus a B and. The A's two of them they cancel we're left with just circuit y have.

The same bool poly numbers we've algebra with this simplifying rule that to. So the circuits are equivalent poem to show Zen what is said okay there's an or gate with an gate and. The inputs are a B so how do you express the if it was just or. It would be a plus B plus to invert that inverting means adding 1. So this what a nor gate does two inputs a and B that right how about w-well here. We have an and gate plus a and 1 plus B so we just have to take.

The that out we get 1 plus a plus B plus a B and yes number for Z is. The same as the boule poly number equivalent by the way the equivalents here is just at. The level of of all the logic here right so front so here here instead having an inversion at of. The front and the the effect is to change the haven't starting with an or and inversion and. When here is moved to the other side there's two of these two things and. They express a simple logic more equivalences to show so let's have a look let's see.

If we can write down an expression for and the two inputs are what well. The top input is the or of a and B we're taking the end. The product because an and is like a product of so what happens. When we expand this out a B times a B times B is also a B and a B times a B is also of them is a single a B and. We see directly if yes indeed those two are equivalent okay how about gate an and gate and an or gate let's or what are. The inputs is a and B which is the to represent this or gate temporarily use.

In the algebra of boule to represent on or what it's equal to but right. Now we'll just put when we expand this let's go up this let's expand. This one here first all right some B is a plus B plus a B okay. Now what do we one plus the second one a plus B plus a B plus B plus a B there's. Some cancellations here there's two of them so they disappear what of these terms will be an AP a B times a is. So there's three of them two of them cancel we will cancel no we've already canceled.

The ABS and that's the same as Bo this all here is just. One more here is P and we want to simplify okay here's the same oh that's why it's. All what about P what is this equal to okay here's an finished. The diagram sorry okay we need some input one here like that so a and B are. The inputs both there's an or gate to that connects them in put. The first one is a B that's the result of with this thing here and.

This is an XOR gate which circle some with what it's equal to. In the algebra the product a B times a plus B and what does. All end when we expand here we're going to get a B extra a be out front here and again we're getting that's. The output Oh so yes indeed these two are all right in this problem we're going to look at is just a manifestation of. The associative law equivalence when we replace the and gates here the first. One here Q what's happening is we have C so and is represented by multiplication.

So Q is is ABC and similarly R over here is well now. We a ok we put a may be there and again we're taking are. The same and it's just telling us that we can replace the ends with Nan's. So over here s what would be 1 plus a B so we have to take. One plus input is an and of a and B that itself is. One plus C so here we're taking one plus the product of the plus C plus a B C over here T it's another NAND write.

It as 1 plus a times the result of this NAND a b c and. We can see that these are not equal equal there's a see here there's an a here. So that we've just had a look at and to introduce to it. So we could call these triple input that they still don't depend on. The order of the three inputs coming in and this means that we're. So it's a and B and C which algebraically is we first combined a and B with an and gate and that's just new notation that we'll introduce and which represents addition because addition is also and.

Then C it's the same as doing a first and then gate itself represented by us with a circle sum B circle. Some C and let's just check that this depend on the ordering so it's let's suppose that. We have a well-defined operation to algebraically circle some C so then we have to take a plus B. We can a plus B plus okay there's a see there's a c.b.c plus a B C and there's no cancellation that it's symmetrical because. It consists of sort is obviously symmetrical if you permute the a B's quadratic symmetric expression a B plus AC plus BC. The unique cubic symmetric expression ABC so once fact yes this does not depend on.

The ordering of C and expanded we would have gotten exactly the triple input for an and triple input for XOR and to do that for a NAND gate or an or gate or an X is not preserved for. The NAND gate so it doesn't an and gate and and have a well-defined meaning to together for. This logic bull story we're going variety of the things that we can do. Now within the the symmetrical aspect of what I've just so let's have a look at these expressions which have a look at. This configuration here so we have the first and gate takes an A and B. The second and B and C and all those three are then input into of.

This thing well it's an xor xor es plus and the an and gate. So what we're getting here is a B that that's the output of that expression because it's reflected. In the fact that the bool poly number have also built the same symmetrical expression starting with a symmetrical circuit and. So the at variant of this here we have three or gates so here's a or B here's a or C and here's B or C gate is multiplication. We have to take three things that were taking the product of well. In terms of ORS like circle some a circle some B let's convert that as.

We want to do into the one so here we have a plus B plus a B and here. We plus BC okay now we have some multiplication to things here first. This term times this see okay that's gonna end up cancelling then a be be a be a b c and another ABC open. It up here ABC by B plus C plus BC okay can we simplify. This so a B there's cancelled with that a be here's a C's. I guess we have a plus what did I say plus let's see what happens.

When we expand that multiplying these three by a multiplying by BC BC gonna cancel and. The BC times BC will be another case ABC ABC ABC so there's three of them after clears what do. We get we get a B plus AC plus all right since I don't have room I'm gonna whether. This one gives us the same expression or symmetrical but it's not clear which. One here we we have an xor gate there a triple xor gate. One all right so that illustrates some of we want to always convert everything to a bool and dried and it's.

All just grade 9 algebra is zero and any powers can be rubbed off. So a to do algebra this way okay in our next issue for. The boolean algebra story circuit as a sum of products or as a product. The point of view of the algebra pool where we light hope you'll join me for that I'm Norman.