# 251 A brief history of logic： Aristotle and deduction

This lecture explores ancient greece and the main aim that we're working historically belongs to. Philosophy not mathematics first foray into that okay philosophy is a little present things against and and syllogisms. In his setup of what ends up being what is logic it's the study of valid from premises and. The situation typically is that else and we want to establish certain results and. Then moving step by step in a logical way conclusion that we're aiming for. Now we know that and you may have intelligent people and they can and it's very hard to get somebody to come around.

So the ancient Greeks along with lots of other or finding methods of arguing that could be sort especially noteworthy especially convincing okay there are. In fact Indian and Chinese schools I'm not going to say too much. The the course that thought and European thought and into the to the an ancient Greece where. We find the origins of the philosophers in ancient Greece there was a fella 430 BC and his teacher Parmenides. So they were and they set up so-called reductio ad absurdum you're trying to establish and. Then try to reach were paradoxes somehow involved and there's also interesting the idea of establishing.

Some facts have two people and one person is in the other person an antagonist or towards an conclusion that. They may is called dialectic and involves the interrogator which are leading questions which are often very a lot of leeway for waffling and by. This means systematically Lee this person into a situation on themselves and the idea is that. This is or an audience so other people are watching much as you are. The person that you're talking to except in our legal court right in our a prosecutor or a defense lawyer is interrogating. The witness towards some conclusion that they motivators for logic is how do.

We set up ways now a next important figure is Plato lived also and. The teacher of Aristotle so those three the of thinkers probably played a greater role. In the Tripel of teachers so he was the founder dialogues investigated a whole range of issues of which is. The study of knowledge and although a keen exponent of mathematics and its value philosophical questions but which are. In the what is the nature of true and false what's the of an argument what exactly are. We doing when from the initial assumptions to the conclusion important question the idea that.

The meanings of a very important aspect of careful thinking so and he set up a school. In Athens it was he had a school and Aristotle was one of many to to learn about. The world so now we lived from 384 to 322 BC and was. One of the modern and very broad sense so he was aside from of Alexander. The Great that had quite an great son of Philip Macedonia ended up conquering happy position and until Alexander died and. Then he had to leave Athens and go back home he was probably.

The widest ranging writer wrote eloquently and thoughtfully and precisely on metaphysics poetry ethics psychology linguistics and. So before we get to his books on logic I do thinking in. The metaphysical direction and so it's by Aristotle it's one of the first writings of. Aristotle here politics nikka million and poetry and metaphysics and thing is said to be sometimes. In an accidental the accidental sense we say that the man of honor is a man similarly. We say that the musician is musician or the musician a builder in.

This sense one is an accident of the other so in the examples and. The musician is a man or that the pale man senses mean that both predicates are accidents that. It is that it's predicate is an accident of that being a musician is an accident of. The man it has a slightly different meaning in the many senses a thing essentially is is shown by. It for to be has as many senses as there are forms quality others its quantity others its relation others its place and others it's time and for sense of being it's quite important and that we'll get to. In the twentieth century again and is not that it is not true but false.

This is Socrates is musical means that this is true or but the diagonal of a square is not commensurate it's great that. He uses that example example rate aware of that that in commencer ability of. The in some cases we have mentioned mean potential is seeing when either. It can potentially see or either can use his knowledge or is is already present. In it or it is able to rest hermes is in the stone and. The half of the line ripe but when a thing is potential and.

When it is this dichotomy between potential and actual later discussions of set theory. When to get to ganon he wrote six books on logic and this was basically set up. The theory of logic almost from mature state in such a sense that even 2000 years really. The framework for subsequent developments he bases his logic on so the statement of. This every C is an A so the a B and C here represent. The structure is somewhat general and doesn't predicates a B and C so.

The statement if every B is notation capital a little a capital B. The little a for all the second statement every C is a B is is that. Every C is an A which is represented by a us that this is been inverted from what. It but Aristotle wrote this in a different is really more in the direction of what. Aristotle strange and and usually these days people here but so he would say that. If a B belongs to all C so to distinguish between these two things up here to.

The familiar one in our situation so if mortal and every Greek is a man. Then every Greek for is mortal B is standing for is a man and C is. The same statement would be the following that belongs to all Greeks then mortality belongs to. In somehow parallel to the distinction between we might be tempted to say well. This is about every B is an a every B is an A surely that means. The set of C of A's but the Aristotelian or properties that here's a property a property a man and.

One property implies another okay example of a logical conclusion which is very depend on it's such surefire a logical argument. So for his elementary propositions and the forest you're talking about all of something or. Some of or some man has a certain property and the other does have or does not have. We get four to denote them by letters the letters a II I became quite important and formalized are predicates and. This is the one we've already as saying a belongs to all be a belongs to. All every man is mortal they're equivalent same thing when we write a little e B.

It means for example immortality belongs to no man that here or for us no man is immortal no B is an a either. Some negation and then I now we have some a some man is an a. Some B is an a that's the I and of this one a does not belong to. Some B or some B that are the ingredients of his arguments it's arc we'll have. This general form so now we in which certain things being stated something. Aristotle is particularly interested in are these and premise two and then we have a conclusion.

So if what I might state it in terms of our or our B. Then this implies then there's every C is an A and so this is. One logical rule it's valid for any choice of predicates a B and C rules and. So they end up having names I'm not sure they they were given these Latin names and for a logical law and it's called Barbara because able to remember that there's an a here there's. One is seller --nt which as the vowel suggests eb b AC implies a EC. So this means no B is an A C is an A that's called seller nth and.

Then dari a little icy and Ferriero is a little be be little an example of Dario. All Isles have big eyes some eyes so all vowels have big eyes. So owls have belong to owls and this one here some hunters the. Some hunters are owls the conclusion is that leave you to come up with an example of Ferriero figure syllogisms and here our second figure but. The common predicates here are both in the B little EC that's called sin sorry e a e. Then B little EC feste know a little a be a little be a little OC implies B little OC.

So let's look the first one is AE B that means that no B is an A a. Some C is an A and this one here some C is not reasonable. So here are some exercises or both examples of two of these the first. One is all useful those are the premises we're supposed to true and. Now the conclusion is that if we assume are not informative okay another. One ball fish humans are fish let you figure out which ones as you might suspect.

The third figure is when in the first spot and not mixed but both. In the for you if you haven't seen this thing syllogisms that have that general form can even get. So this syllogistic logic was worked discussed and special cases and interpretations a foundational thing for subsequent millennia mathematics although. He was interested in infinity and he distinguished between potential going to be thinking about. In the context of sets infinity or use it so Aristotle is a is that modern set theory which foundations on correct. So Aristotle is an ally in this general poses an alternative view on.

The metaphysical metaphysics an alternative view to the view of it comes to foundational issues for mathematics two worlds there's our world and there's an ideal world may appear real to us but it's not here it's. The ideal world that we cannot directly this world is a reflection or a shadow for mathematicians especially those who like to real numbers that go on to infinity and and. So on are happening somewhere in Plato's ideal world Aristotle says there's only. One world this is it has matter and form so there's there's and. I want to point out that this Aristotelian up in a major way by a colleague of mine James founded. The Sydney school of philosophy which thinking in this direction he's written a nice than.

I could so we'll be touching base with this thoughts are very important but. This is at least to really the birth of of logic but it turns out ancient world also coming from Greece and. In alternatives so.