# 252 A brief history of logic： Stoics and other thinkers

[music] Good day i'm Norman Wildberger and today the history of logic going back also to ancient second important thread of study. In ancient school of Greek philosophy that was founded by this is opposed to. The other Zeno that's usually philosophy that's these days still well known Spartan lifestyle. One sense of somebody's stoic maintaining an equal balance but historically the a way of thinking about. The whole world ethics the logic which were mostly interested rules of thought there was also a physical or or. The universe and then this ethical aspect peace of mind basically by living.

In sync or in to be virtuous that's a stoic position development of an alternate way of thinking about point of view. Now historically it turned out that of view was eventually almost forgotten until are starting to appreciate that. They had their xeno school was influenced quite a lot by another about them later on but xenos orientation was sort to become a wise person perception assent not and. Then knowledge so four steps towards becoming interested in was really crystallized by Chris lived from 279 to 206 BCE. So he was one of founded a propositional logic he evidently wrote influential and a very highly regarded logician of his actual direct correspondence and his writings is fragmentary or through. Some indirect knowledge of his branch of logic comes from later stoic philosophy maintained itself throughout.

The were some critics of stoicism who refer end up finding out about what. The the original logic let's compare it to Aristotle's logic so logic that was concerned with statements of are mortal. All Greeks are men stuff like this fish or some Greeks are tall or. Some Greeks are involving subject and a predicate the subject is would be Socrates it's like a noun. The like an adjective or sometimes a verb so linguistics or grammar here. The roles of these constructions in a sentence these are sometimes now when.

We come to the stoic construction of they're interested in statements of a generally. In statements that involve propositions P and Q and they're interested in relating propositions propositions. Then they might be interested in P is it is raining and Q is. I get wet so get wet and this statement here is a composite raining. Then I get wet it's an implication so implication if it's raining then. I get wet yes of combining things is to form a function using.

So both P and Q both it is raining and I get ingredients to form a larger idea and. Then the logical connective or either P or Q either it this one here because. This one is quite different this sentence in an exclusive or fashion that to be true. If one of the two possibilities was two would be two different sides of a coin or sort possibilities for example night or day either. It both night and day either this way or this way a Democrat or you're a Republican either it's hot that's. The thing that's represented today in what's called a propositional logic we interpret.

The or in a broader sense so we're red or flat and then that'll be true. If it's flat it could be flat not red or it could be both describing statements that are formed like between propositions. So it was really an early going again two millennia later in the. The logicians identified what they called five in of arguments that could be used a lot like. The we start with some premises and then we're of the statements are different they're involving here. They are and the first one is is here along there's three statements here separated P.

Then Q statement number one statement number read this in the following way that we'll suppose P. Then Q and P and Q are just names for some really matter what. They are so we're assuming if we're assuming if P then Q is true we're assuming two together that. We can deduce the truth of it is raining I get wet and that. It is a legitimate form of argument that they medieval people called it modus ponens. So this variant of this is the following if P then Q not Q wet.

We know that not Q it I do not get wet so what get wet and. I do not get wet you can deduce that modus tollens okay here's another. One it's got Q so here's another connective to take is doing so it's not true that P and Q and P going to town and I'm having dinner. If it's not what this means both of those things and it's not conclude that I'm not having dinner because of those things I'm doing. One of them so I must involving the disjunction or and I remember that is an exclusive or that they're talking about it's our usage. So their rule is that if either it's day or night and it's day.

Then you may deduce argument in modern logic it's not so this shows it's not as. If God has given us logic logic is rule makes sense in our context and someone and somebody else says something different here and. The final one another destruction either familiar so the Stoics were at possession of these demonstrable forms and. I guess that means that can't demonstrate them because they're just true true that between any two points you can draw a. The same well that's that's obviously true we're like that is going on here and it's an interesting of view whether these facts. If they are indeed that we are confident are true or things that are teaching these things to young people do you say look these are true statements and because.

Some reasons you give some explanations you try okay in any case we see that they're not far from. Some basic propositional logic of even taught in aspect of their thought is that remember that. We people so we're not really in possession of their know that this so-called law of excluded middle is a famous conundrum that even plays still points of view different people have of. This logical tenant so what is it it's a single proposition P and it's negation not P. So or not P and you ask is the statement P or not P or not P. So let's say the statement is P is is raining or it is not raining.

So in that case obvious but the answer to this question is depends on who you ask there are differences statement. So to give you a sense of that from a following suppose that P is not is. It raining or is the universe is infinite the universe that a true statement well it's not. So clear infinite whatever that means or to decide that the very well be beyond our capabilities. It might be just something that we're incapable of and so argument that. Then we're not in a position to of two statements if we cannot understand.

The probably should not be making statements about reason for that although you could also argue different ways. Now Aristotle addressed this kind the proposition P was a sea battle will take place. In the harbor and we're wondering will a a sea battle will take place tomorrow and not P place tomorrow. Now the question is the true today today is it true that a sea battle a sea battle will take place tomorrow well. This base with aspects of determinism and we think about the way the world unfolds because here and and tomorrow and making statements about coming down on. The side of the answer here is a little bit divided on what.

Aristotle also were let's say skeptical about whether this something of a fatalistic. Philosophy they kind way they are and your job is to just accept things you can. So they certainly lean towards determinism around the edges that's relevant not P and let me try to explain that here. In now I don't think the Stoics had such a thing as we get into. The 19th and 20th century versions Stoics would have understood very very clearly and Q and these are. The various possibilities for and F being false so these are the four possible values of.

The composite statement P or Q so if false you could put an asterisks there because stoic interpretation of. This that that's false if the disjunction is true and similarly in this case. This thing is false so the stoic would have going on with with. This one what you need to do is okay you identify which row of. The table you on then you can determine that P or Q is true fair here's P here's not P. So they're related in a very is false then not P is true and.

Now we can ask P or not P well what we have to do is. We have to going to see over here where we are and so either get a T but we're not sure which. Some question as to whether we're really P or not P is true. So I guess we come back to this we determining the truth of these various things because. It makes sense to us or do we have some of support our statements see there's there's underlying. This this question there's another Stoics had a different approach to things than aspect of truth.

So when we're looking at simple time like the dog is sick the dog is not sick but dog might be sick today but. Next week it's not so there's a question about what happens to the dependent on time. So for example the statement it here today in Sydney it is warm day even though. I can say it is warm today and that is a true is will. This state would retain its truth for for then and say ah Norman said a true statement. So if now and it's cold outside is it then still have changed makes.

The statement it is warm today to somehow regard statements as somehow time meaning that we're associating a statement statement years to come. We can see the index when was a true statement so therefore it is still apply to us. Now but the Stoics did not adopt his given statement can change its truth value over a whole kettle of fish which is quite interesting. I think later developments of logic how the truth we can see the origins of that already here things. Now the implication is a very interesting often causes students of logic some problems even formulation of how to interpret. This statement that the Stoics had so the Stoics had the same in its meaning.

So let's look at this so here's P possibilities and here's this composit statement. The statement if P then Q is is also true if P then Q is false. In fact that's the only time it is it doesn't matter then the implication is true. So we have statements like this which are according blatantly false statement like let's say. If Norman and then I'm going to put here some some may be a that. The following is a true statement if Norman is a true statement according to.

The modern rules logic yeah that's that's interesting and so it's understanding of implication and well we'll talk work. In the work of boule and so on now I'd also school of. Philosophy that was somewhere each other so this was founded by Euclid ease of student also of Socrates. So so rather yes and still po in the around the fourth century and. So again we don't know too much about their comprehensive is available but. We have indirect called Diodorus and it's interesting that he had what is possible what does what does.

It mean for possible is limited to what is or will be the way. We think about things so if we go back battle tomorrow or there's not going to be. One of those things is going to happen so the statement both of these are possible both of them are possible. The one that is possible there is a sea battle tomorrow then that there is a sea battle tomorrow. If tomorrow us to say well there's possibly going to be a with determinism was. The idea of the universe it interesting it's very counterintuitive for us question.

I guess that's behind all of these things to Plato and probably earlier people and although. This is my last slider let me step back from my worth here. I think that a lot of this discussion out to be particularly useful. When we come to the different reasons which will we'll come to later quite important but. In terms of just a calculus of think it's very simplistic to think that. The world aren't that many statements which are entirely more or less true or more or less false are.

In some gray area in between and as the idea that it's it's really hard to there probably isn't. The fence various much on your position and your history and your and. So on and so forth so absolute notions of true this is some baby version of. The of the happening in the world and I I have the sense of. All men are mortal therefore Socrates is immortal minimally directly useful to the modern world debate by by bringing up. This incredible don't think it's gonna happen I think debates subtle things by other for other reasons not by.

This not enough saying that they don't have some guide to truth in. The universe I think this that's my own position that's not to minimize its case that over time. The the stoic the Megerian way less forgotten as the years went by Aristotle's which we'll talk about. Next time it was recently in the last hundred years has there thinking and an appreciation for how close. They quite interesting so in our next video we're and see how logic progressed on its way towards dramatically. So.