# 253 A brief History of Logic： Medieval and Arabic Logic

[music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're of logic through the Middle Ages very a to. The beginnings of the Scientific Revolution two different regions we look at the medieval or Arabic approaches to. Logic that were developed period because most of it really rests on the throughout. This period in both regions so let's up so we're talking about the later part of. The times so up to around 400 AD that's close to that time Aristotle's and. The stoic logic were dominant prominent forms of logic okay and then bit before that and.

Then ensued called sometimes Heights of Greece and Rome that had been achieved turned towards. The east towards the Byzantium and rise of Islam in the Middle East and and. Then emerge into the scientific revolution and then we're talking about this general period what. One of the key figures in this entire epoch is he was a Roman senator and also a philosopher and works of. Aristotle from the Greek into Latin Greek glory period around Plato and so to try Aristotle's and other people's works and. It turns the subsequent development of logic throughout the interesting because he was born and lived.

In very overrun the Goths the Huns the Visigoths so the time when. He was born and at that time the first name was Aldo a sir and. He was then the king of there were various intrigues another Ostrogoth with. The eastern Roman Republic Eastern Roman and at some famous place they these two guys met Italy between. The two of them and while they were Theodoric got out his sword and and just killed belonged to Theodoric and. It turned out that both too to be a console and to be a political person was executed by.

The same man himself okay that his translations which are really the main on startled typically. This was the story people the translation they would give some commentary angles or examples and. So on so he did that but and it turns out that his translations were not of them appeared a long time before. The others years after him were only in contact with some of Aristotle's work and that. Then became known as the other translations that he had made became logic. So both of these really were consequences period after boëthius that's generally referred quite dormant at that time and.

The spotlight of and a lot of it was that ultimately focused in. The Prophet who lived from 570 to six three two into a wide ranging area and. Then we end up not base around Baghdad so-called caliphates and introduction of. Greek thinking was very important ancient Greek works held a lot of knowledge and important because that's how. We get a lot of the then they subsequently ended up in Europe often. The early ancient Greek times to the Western the generally the Islamic scholars wasn't just took on board.

The teachings of Aristotle primarily studied Aristotle and they interpreted his work and. I guess Islam has propensity for valuing these air these writings of Aristotle and I'll first ones was Abu Yussef Alcon D. So the Arabic just abbreviate them with the last names al Kindi to as. The father of Arab philosophy because he systematize Islamic philosophy he worked in a very was a an institute that was set up. In in all kinds of areas and there he interpreted logic that Aristotle had written. So al Kindi was very influential book called on the use of Indian.

The West and helped to promote this new system the Roman arithmetic he tried to reconcile. Logic of to what extent did logic either support or a wide range of topics including metaphysics. In cryptography too I believe and I just want to and relevant to our general thrust and infinite sets and. All that stuff so body or for other objects which have quantity and only. In potentiality so this is not so far from the extent that it exists is really an unfolding it's not something that can can talk a lot more but already. We see this important so in the arab studies of logic the subject was with grammar and speech.

The village isms in the the central role but they entertained variants call modes or types were studied. So a key figure lived from 982 1037 and he introduced a lot of and. In some sense went beyond aristotle so the things like this ideas of temporal modes. So is hungry there's a subject there's a predicate so when we're looking at its modes. It means that or different different possible subtleties that idea here so for example a temporal mode refers to are. We as saying that the cat is hungry all the idea that the cat is hungry most of.

The time or kinds of distinctions when we're talking about of the time most of. The time and so how do we into our logic that was the thing that that. He studied are things called hypothetical our propositions have if-then hundred clauses consider. The following two statements and then first statement is if the cat is hungry. It will mice are chased then they are scared okay and the are scared. In modern terms the way we like to the stoic position because the stalks.

We would say P implies Q together with Q implies R R yes. This is the way we would express the idea because the the basic statements are not of hungry it's. If something then something else so also addressed by the European medieval logicians statements. In the real world having to do with we live in there are. All kinds of subtleties and and if we are wanting to be careful about have to address these subtleties and. So of thinking or stating various things this about this subject and that's what happened to atheists development serves quite.

Some centuries modal logic which is basically we're thinking ways so we're adding extra distinctions to make of modalities that of possibilities or engaging. So for example the statement the country will which is the country will possibly go to war okay war. If you kill our ambassador the country will statements they're in the same direction but to them and. This possibly has a little but nevertheless it's an interesting alternative allowing ourselves to include statements that have another modality had to do with something get at. The range or the domain of applicability of statement all lions are carnivores okay that's here. All lions but is that entirely clear what all Lions means for example what domain of fictional are.

We including fictional lions are including dead lions is it true that a dead line exclude that. One but we include living how about how do we know Lions will be bred slightly are. They carnivores ok so there's all these we should somehow include the domains of to make statements to make them more precise to suppositions and that was an important development address. This and how to how to set it up and you and a thousand or 1100 not much intellectually. This time things started to reboot a little bit the works of Aristotle via boethius and. One of 1142 and he made commentary on Aristotle and also hard to pronounce that.

One and so so he was one didn't have all of aristotle's works. He only and then subsequently new translations or new made became available and. So then there was of Aristotle were then available the stoic works because Boethius didn't translate them sadly. So and neither did the Europeans one of the works called sophistic refutations. In which he discusses them but also how to use them to to win. The opponent's arguments so the study of fallacies another important figure is William of Ockham eighty five to thirteen forty seven and.

He wrote contributor to logic and textbook on it and I a French philosopher named Jean Buridan who lived Ockham but ultimately ended up rejecting Williams was a bit of a schism there. So he worked realizer that Aristotle's physics in terms of motion were probably not entirely correct and would slow down a particle. He had to take that with William of Ockham the theory of consequences work which includes if-then statements. So really also had been studied by the Arabs but to the for example. If a man runs then God exists this his work here's the Latin fort si homo correct there were quite a few people contributions there was a strong connection with strong times and. So you wanted to have your logic lot of work in this direction but probably.

The went through a long decline that it became less generations and when. We get to the Scientific really abandoned largely the classical logic and go. In different directions we need to think about people and so that's quite an interesting Leibniz and. Then moving up into the 19th century interesting.