# 254 A brief history of logic： from Leibniz to Boole

Good day I'm Norman Wildberger and today we're of logic up to modern times from. The 17th century George Boole so at this stage logic really different relationship with mathematics. In former mathematicians take only a marginal interest in change and modern mathematicians start to look at what. The philosophers have done and what classical story and the connection between the. Logic new developments of the mathematical thinkers is 1500 after John Borden Aristotle's influence for rational thought diminished markedly as. The people were looking towards the future they had that they had studied and recognized their value and.

We can go beyond the Greeks we can learn that were not possible before and. Aristotle was the reasons and the other reason was the reasoning the logical reasoning was no longer. In it was rather as a vehicle for understanding the to find ways of thinking that would unlock. The ambitious program really than Aristotle's sort for the syllogisms so one representative of. This a book called Novum organum taking the name or of thinking about things and. He was promoting to reasoning so in the inductive approach what we world.

We look at particular instances and then armchair thing where we just put together that consequence. All the things we already logic changed and you another aim was that making a more precise language for exploring. This and another big change that happened as I've to look more carefully at. The logical foundations mathematical successes that they had in astronomy motion they wanted to extend that beyond were interested. In systematizing reasoning to correctly and that of course is very analogous have. Some interest in the classical work for that bridging this gap between the mathematics and lived from 1640 six to 1716 and.

In the century many geniuses Leibniz probably stands out as the remarkable fellow and. So he had massive notation for calculus just beautiful choices of mathematical content symbolically. So important calculus that followed the foundations of Newton he was a lawyer originally did a PhD. In law he was a philosopher also mathematician but only an amateur interest. In mathematics and then was to learn some more mathematics it was probably him. Some books Pascal and Descartes and Leibniz said okay let's let's do that let's learn period.

He had caught up to a lot of the contributing new and important additions to those geologist storied librarian absolute genius and. In 1671 he produced a calculating machine which was entirely mechanical it was a device each other and you cranked handles like addition multiplication subtraction and division working although. They were a little bit that he was able to create such a machine thinking. In terms of the beginnings of computation interested in in the bridge between mathematics quote of live notes. It is beneath the dignity of when any peasant could do the work just as a machine to do arithmetic. We don't need to invest thing about reasoning this was a lofty idea that thinking logical careful thinking and.

So we some formal symbolic logic that allowed as essentially the same as between correct and idea and turned out to be very fruitful although fruit pretty well 200 years. So this was his reason where we use symbols and established rules about things to reason for us. So reasoning becomes be expressible doable by machines come to fruition at least not. In and I don't think they were really widely accepted this direction was only published. In the 19th on the Morgan or boule or other people in the. In didn't really get off the ground so liveness was the 18th century there were more developments.

In a logical direction exploring things but I'm not going to say too much about that start to emerge where a liveness for example had A's are bees ok. So that was represented by live in terms of a formula like this. This is on Oyler had a Venn diagram approach to things he a as a circle they're contained inside that. All A's are bees and Lambert had some kind represented by segments and equations that looked representations for logical propositions as well and. Then we come to the 19th century where these together and they were formalized and. So this was a very interesting development where and provide a mathematical understanding.

The usual story right the 20th century that logic is a foundation for mathematics. The opposite that logic had been moving along years as part of philosophy and. Then in the 19th and these other people's ideas it started to least aspects of. Logic purely mathematically and and say look we can apply mathematical ideas the mathematical precision and and care general and that's what happened here. In the 19th out also or people didn't realize this at the computing. In fact it's not an exaggeration to say all around us really has its logical origins.

In and there were quite a few people involved but is Augustus de Morgan an English mathematician. In classical logic then he wrote a book called he's being mathematical what are. The things that idea that we should denote make a boundary make for. All the objects that we are considering okay this universe then if we have. Some subset of it attributes or properties then we can talk about things. In the universal set which are outside the and that's given often with.

This bar notation he discovered two important laws I am now known as negation of a disjunction is. The conjunction of and set theoretically that's represented saying that the if you have two sets a and B and. The Union all inside our Universal set then intersect the complement of B and. Then the is the disjunction of its negations so same law are interchanged and just like be. The complement the complement of B so a Morgan was D Morgan was as. The man who were going to come up next who great insights so I'm referring to George Boole a and just.

He might be called the starts to emerge in the nineteenth century and abstract where where mathematics not as a tool real world but as a study of abstract structure of people can contribute to that for example sir george bulls was a contributor that with a theory. In in something of that direction he utilized remarkable because he was more or less attended school. He was from a poor family he ended learned mathematics on the side but eventually. He remarkable discoveries including these two but professor was the first professor of. So the books that he's most famous for in the pamphlet called the mathematical analysis of. In 1854 called the investigation of the laws theories of logic and probability.

So with these approach to the Aristotelian syllogisms he's very very much they're centerpiece for him but wants to strip them of. Some of the subtleties and that philosophers have them and just bring and study. This underlying algebraic structure important these days it's called boolean algebra the algebra of bool. This is not as widely algebra these days in the context of circuit and Gates or gates and NAND gates and. So on and it's assumed that the underlying logic algebra is is the algebra but that's not not very very important differences and. So the boolean something that some math additions following boule did not really concur with with.

This quite some detail as to this because it's a very mathematics but also truly to understand. The 20th century so as a preliminary to that I want books are quite different. I really like this one here I've only given cursory look at it it's goes off. In lots of different directions I find I'm gonna be telling you about. The mathematics looking at it somewhat novel way so we're going to encounter here but we're going to. So bear with me here I have a online copy of can read.

It to Project Gutenberg the mathematical the Internet and I'd want to just give you. Some get a sense of George Boole get a sense of his well nicely written let's start great at first paragraph of. The preface in presenting this observe that speculations similar to those occupied my thoughts. In the spring of my present then moved between Sir W Hamilton and professor here being that. The W Hamilton probably refers to Hamilton's around one was Scottish and no an. They were they were both in contact with George between Sir W Hamilton and professor de Morgan and to resume.

The almost forgotten thread of former but the capital L might be viewed with reference a deeper system of relations. If it was lawful through the medium of number with the intuitions from within as based upon facts of another order mind results of. This view and of the inquiries treatise ok now I'm going to fast foreword to. In the introduction first paragraph they who are of symbolical algebra bar aware that. The validity the interpretation of the symbols which are combination that is such a great sentence you is ease of analysis right today to not depend are employed but solely upon. The laws of their with the thing that I'm often talking write down on.

The page and the manipulations that content interpretations there are many different every system of interpretation which does not equally admissible and. It is thus that the same resent represent the solution of a question on a geometrical problem and under a third that of indeed of fundamental importance and. It may with pure analysis have been much assisted by the the current of investigation. This is so close to to distill the the essences of different areas come from and. Then look at the logical structure and then the conclusions that we come to can be. This is where mathematics gets a lot of its power is not an idle frivolous undertaking right.

This I might skip ahead here let's see if so it comes to. This a logical proposition is an equation the form of which determines the rules given proposition is subject. Thus the law of what by the fact that the corresponding equations are change of place. In those symbols which correspond might be the following statement suppose you have are kittens. So from a logical point of view that pets some kittens are pets logically equivalent equivalence at. The level of logical things ends equation so he's got equations that represent equations according to certain rules and that's interesting.

It turns out that the underlying I'll just finish with the end of his introduction. Philosophy is then described as the science of that no doubt may rest upon. The meaning of the mainly investigates the why these definitions one of Sir William Hamilton Sethe or ''tis. The things of which the mathematician searches out here's something else that he says a little bit by. The study of logic as an exact science is in of analysis we see here. The promise of the Stoics and the Islamic and the of it can.

All be boiled down to some certain extent demonstrated and we're going talk about. The algebra of boule and and bringing structure of logic.