# Introducing (finally!) Box Arithmetic ｜ Math Foundations 237 ｜ N J Wildberger

foreign [Music] I'm Norman Walberger I've been introducing something of a new point of view towards arithmetic, fundamental arithmetic using the mset approach, where we consider data collections which are unordered and where repetitions are allowed as the central  building blocks of our arithmetic and our algebra. We've had some pretty good success and we've gotten a fair way down, but we can  see there's a lot further to go. There's a lot of details and, , careful structuring that's required. But at this stage here we've introduced some really novel elements having to do with anti-particles or the mathematical equivalents of them. And so it's time, I think, to sit back and to look at what we've already done and to try to reframe it. When we're developing mathematics, it's important to not always just be at the forefront, but also to occasionally go back to what we've done earlier, , and try to understand, well, what's really, what have we done here, and have we done it in an optimal way considering how the thing is unfolding as we're proceeding.

Oftentimes the initial definitions or notation or whatever that we create aren't really optimal, but that only becomes apparent  further on down the road. And we have to be prepared to have this  reevaluation possibility. That's what we're going to do today. It's not a very long lecture; there's only two slides. First, i'm going to just review what  more or less we've been doing and then we're going to introduce box arithmetic. Okay, so we've introduced arithmetic via msets, and starting with zero, the empty mset is just a box, say, with nothing in it.

Now typically I've been writing things in a linear fashion, but that's more or less  just in accord with our usual way of writing things. For today's talk, it'll be a little bit better if we move to this more obviously two-dimensional approach where the box aspect of things becomes more apparent. Once we have zero, then we define a natural number to be simply an mset of zeros, a collection of zeros. In other words, empty boxes which are unordered and which, of course, repetitions are allowed. This, for example, is how we think about the usual number two. Then we go down one step, we define poly numbers.

A poly number is an mset of natural numbers. Here is an mset, the big box, and inside it there's a natural number, and this is also a natural number because it's a  a special case of this one here. We end up with this family of nested objects in mathematics, usually called a  filtered object as opposed to a graded object. At every stage, the new things that we're invoking include already the previously defined things. At the next stage we define multi numbers, which are msets of poly numbers. Here's an example of a multi number.

This thing here you can see is the poly number that we've just defined, and here are a few others. In the usual way that i'm  wanting to link things up with ordinary polynomial algebra, this was corresponding to 1 plus alpha squared. This is corresponding to one here, and this one here to Alpha squared. And this thing here, well, a little bit of thought and familiarity with what we've done will show you that this is equal to 2 plus Alpha 0 plus Alpha zero Alpha two. Now in going from here to here, what I've done is I've  introduced, again, some new notation which isn't really necessary at this stage, but when you go to this stage, it does become necessary. We're going to rewrite this as 1 plus alpha 0 squared.

Just in the world of poly numbers this is  extraneous and unnecessary, but when we move to multi numbers, where we get more variables with different indices, then the ordinary alpha gets replaced with alpha zero. Okay, then we can keep going. This is  an obvious inductive or recursive approach to this thing. And in terms of operations, everything comes down to the unique operation of addition of msets, which is a unique thing that in the world of data structures the msets have that the other data objects don't have: the ability just to dump everything out into a box, thereby adding not just two but an arbitrary number of msets to get another mset. For example, here's an mset, here's an mset. When we add them, we just dump the contents into another box, and we get that thing there.

Then multiplication is defined in terms of addition. A times b, if a and b are msets in this world, is defined as the mset of things in the form a plus b. We look at all possible sums a from a, b from b, and form an mset. And then that's  the pattern that carries on. The next operation, say caret, is defined in terms of this way: if C and D are msets, then C caret D is the mset consisting of all products c times d where little c belongs to capital C and little d belongs to capital D. And obviously we can  keep going.

The whole thing is set up so that recursion or  inductive approach is really natural; it just unfolds in front of us. But admittedly our intuition for what happens  at these lower levels is at this stage pretty minimal. But if we just  stick to multiplication, or maybe a caret also, then we, and down, say, down to this level here, then we recover quite a lot of ordinary arithmetic or algebra. But crucially up to this stage only with natural number coefficients. If we want to have negative number coefficients, well, then that's what we did next. We introduced negatives, and the crucial thing there was that it was almost forced upon us to start thinking in terms of particles and anti-particles the way the physicists do.

There's an electron, maybe, and here's a positron, anti-particles. Okay, so this notion from physics ends up being intimately involved when we start constructing negative numbers and investigating their role. And what I want to do today is I want to bring this particle anti-particle or mset anti-mset duality to the fore. I don't want us to just introduce this at some later stage; I want to now go back and incorporate this right from the beginning. Okay, so I think this is a key difference between this system and all prior systems of arithmetic, and I think we need to  centrally position things so that we can see this duality and, , try to understand this duality very prominently. That's what we're going to do now: we're going to introduce box arithmetic.

Okay, so how are we going to do this? How are we going to introduce box arithmetic? Well, what we want to do is we want to go back and we want to introduce anti-msets and negatives as an essential part of the whole story from the start. And I propose that we're going to do that by thinking about boxes and anti-boxes. We're going to move away a little bit from this idea that everything is written on a line with lots of brackets, nested brackets, all kinds of them, and think more about representing the arithmetical structures in a two-dimensional fashion. And we'll have a box approach, but there will also be a tree approach that's completely equivalent, so it's  a matter of taste or a matter of visual orientation, or maybe, , if you're a computer scientist you're naturally going to be led to want to think about things in terms of trees, and that's fine.

Okay, so boxes and anti-boxes: we're going to proceed in a parallel way to what I've just described but now starting with this duality first and foremost. To begin with, we're going to want to consider just empty boxes. And the crucial thing is that our empty boxes are now of two kinds: there's black ones and there's red ones. The black ones you should think of as being like the ordinary ones that we've already been talking about, and the red ones are some new ones which are considered to be the anti-objects of the black ones. And then what we do is we put these boxes or anti-boxes inside other boxes and anti-boxes exactly the way we've been doing previously, but we're allowed to at any stage use either red boxes or black boxes, so we're mixing these two things. And the fundamental duality between them is represented by these two examples.

Have a look. Here we have a black box, and inside it we have this black box with a red box inside it and two red boxes separately. And over here we have a red box with exactly the same stuff inside it. Okay, so these are the same, these are the same, so these two boxes or anti-boxes are exactly the same except that the bounding, the outside boxes are different colors. We're gonna say that they are dual in this sense, or they are antis of each other. If this thing is x, then this is going to be x super a, or anti-x.

Now, another way of representing that with a tree approach is that we're now going to use trees whose vertices are either black or red, corresponding here, right? This outside box here is represented by that black dot there, and then inside it there is a red box represented by that red node and another red box represented by that red node. There's also a black box represented by that black node, and inside that one there's a red box represented by that red node. And over here, well, it's the same story. They're really exactly the same except for the top, the top node is now here red instead of black. And I've also allowed myself this freedom that we are, we're giving ourselves that the trees are unordered so, , we can move these various ingredients around because of the unordered aspect of the msets that we're considering.

We can also write this thing here, for example, if we wanted to. This is really the same as we could make it like this: foreign Okay, that makes the equality or the duality between this one and this one more obvious, but it's not necessary. So, , but this thing here and this thing here are just different because of the top, the entry, the top node being a different color. Okay, so now the crucial property between, , with these black and red things and then their anti-aspect is that they disappear, they mutually annihilate each other if they're found in the same mbox. The, so the crucial fact here is that if we have a box or an anti-box with, , with the x in it, okay, x and xa in it all together, then they cancel, and we just get an empty box. And that's the same if we have an anti-box with an X and an X anti in it, we also just end up getting cancellation, and we get we get another red anti-box.

Okay, so that's the crucial aspect that we have this, this duality, but these things cancel out. And let's have a look at this thing here. How do we interpret this? Well, the two red boxes is like a minus two, because if we rub this thing off and just consider a black box with two red boxes inside it, then that, if we added it to a black box with two black boxes inside it, then we would get a total with two black boxes and two red boxes inside, and they would all cancel, we would just get the empty box, which is like zero. This is like minus two just with those two red boxes inside. And what if we just had this black box with a red box inside it?

Well, that would be Alpha, our basic, , poly number variable, Alpha to the minus one. Because if we multiply that by a similar thing with, with a black thing inside there, in other words, a black box with another black box with another black box inside it, that's Alpha, we multiply that with Alpha, then the the inner boxes have to be added, okay, the inner boxes have to be added. And that means that when we add them, the red and the black ones are going to cancel, we're just going to get an empty box. The result of multiplying those two things would be a black box with a single black box inside it, which is the number one. Okay, so that's why this thing here, just by itself, would be Alpha to the minus one. This whole thing here, , in our world, that would be minus two plus alpha to the minus one.

Now, what about this thing here? What is its meaning? Well, as as an object in the mathematical universe currently, this is an unknown object. We have not seen this  thing before. It's like, , if I get the positron, okay, 1930s or maybe 1940, the positron was observed. But before that, , there weren't any positrons as far as people could tell.

This thing here, , what we could say is that what it is is the anti of this. We can say it's minus 2 plus alpha inverse, okay, anti, but what the meaning of that is is not entirely clear. What ends up happening is that when you put these red boxes inside a black box, so in other words, if you consider a box with possibly red boxes inside it or anti-boxes inside it, perhaps under, , deep down in different levels, then that  thing can still end up being represented in principle by a somewhat of an elementary or familiar object, at least, , down to the level of multi numbers. Beyond that, we haven't much experience. The red boxes, or the the anti-boxes, are useful in the sense that they are important constituents in the world of box arithmetic, but just by themselves they have a  a strange ephemeral nature, maybe like, like quarks, , that they make sense when they're constrained in in in a nucleus or something, but, , just isolated quarks we don't really see them in nature, they don't seem to play a role. While there is this symmetry, box anti-box symmetry, there's also a separation in our minds.

We we also want to perhaps ultimately be more interested in the arithmetic on this side and think of the the anti-boxes as  objects which contribute to the richness of the arithmetic over here, but by themselves maybe have an ephemeral nature. I realize this is all rather , , strange, maybe it's like voodoo, but i hope you've been convinced by my previous videos that we're on to something here, that we really are touching base with ordinary mathematical reality, but we're just looking at it in a very different way, and we're  enshrining that very different way here. We're not putting that under the carpet; we want to really put it center stage and look at the consequences. Okay, so that's what we're going to do. We're going to be looking at thinking about box arithmetic being developed in a  consistent way so that this duality is  almost always omnipresent, and that this  what we might call a box, this thing here, this phenomenon here, we might call this box anti-box creation/annihilation. For example, what that means is that when we we look at something like this thing here, okay, we could we could change this, seemingly change it but actually not do anything real to it.

If we put in in this, say, one of these red boxes, if we put inside there a red one and a black one, then the effect is to not change it, we have not changed it. That means, and that's that's true even over on this side, , whenever we put in two objects, boxes or anti-boxes, inside a single constituent, but they're identical except that their top nodes are different colors, then those two things will annihilate, and so they are able to be presented this way. The  shimmering reality that the quantum physicists like to talk about, where we have these fields, and these fields have all these emergent pairs of little particles, , that are being quickly created and then annihilated and they appear and then they disappear, , just for a split second, , and so this is some  really strange thing that that's how they think. What we're seeing is something parallel to that here in this world, that we're able to create these box anti-box pairs and then they're annihilated a second later. If this is really strange, think about it the following way, which which makes it maybe more familiar. When you're doing ordinary arithmetic with fractions, say three over five, okay, you all know that you can replace that by multiplying top and bottom by whatever we want, say like by two.

Three over five is the same as six over ten. What have we done there? Well, we've introduced a new factor on the top and the bottom. The two factors happen to be the same, but they're in different places, so they're playing different roles,  like this red dot and this black dot. They're  the same except that they're different because one's red and one's black. And correspondingly, , one of the twos is in the numerator, one of the twos is in the denominator, and so you can take three fifths and if you like you can quickly change it to six over ten, or you can multiply it by three and get 9 over 15.

Right, you're doing it something very similar. You're creating something more complicated by adding some more factors, but in these two different ways which are  balanced, so they're   a duality. It's actually not that unfamiliar from some point of view. Okay, so now I think with this  general orientation I think we can now go back to the development that we've already had in terms of zeros and natural numbers and poly numbers and multi numbers and  redo all those things, but just starting with the box anti-box point of view. We just carry on down, and it's i think an interesting exercise, and we're going to have to look very carefully at that because we've seen that these particle anti-particle things have some curious, maybe even disturbing, properties when we are doing basic arithmetic just with, say, the zero box and the anti-zero box. It might be that when we restrict ourselves to just boxed arithmetic, that those curious aspects are hidden from sight.

In fact, that's  what I'm thinking will happen, that those  anomalous  things that we're seeing are are not really visible parts of the mathematical or arithmetical world that we're going to create. We're ultimately going to be interested in box arithmetic, but we want to have this symmetry because these guys are going to be crucial ingredients in the boxes. That's a lot of fun. Maybe some of you would like to, , try that out yourself and see how far you get in terms of building up a consistent theory. Ultimately, we want very careful definitions and theorems and proofs, etc. But, , exactly how we're going to do that, that may be still some ways away.

I'm Norman Walberger, thanks for listening. [Music]