# Multiplicative functions and Dirichlet Series via Boxes II｜ Math Foundations 243 ｜ N J Wildberger

[Music] Hello everyone, I'm Norman Wildberger, and this is the second video where we're talking about multiplicative functions and Dirichlet series via box arithmetic. Today we're going to look at a particular  construction that occurs in analytic number theory called the dirichlet series. Here’s a general form of a Dirichlet series, A(s), it's generally regarded that s is a complex number variable. It's a sum from n = 1 to infinity of a sub n over n to the s. A sub n is some prior sequence, and we're summing these  weighted reciprocals of powers. Now, it turns out that these kinds of series form, in some sense, an algebra under a certain type of product or convolution.

The core example of such a thing,  the motivating one, is the Riemann zeta function where the sequence a sub n is just the constant sequence one. Most undergraduates will probably not have touched base with this too much unless they've taken  specialized courses in analytic number theory, but I want to  reposition this topic as a  elementary aspect of box arithmetic. I think that what’s really happening here is in some sense very general and  fundamental at a certain level and will also give us a chance to reposition our thinking a little bit about how we think about polynomials and what  operations we apply in arithmetic and how we apply them. Lots to think about in this lecture. But before I go there, let me just give my usual reservations about this  thing. So, right from my point of view, this is all in quotes because, first of all, it doesn’t make sense in general to take a natural number and raise it to a general complex number.

That doesn’t mean anything to me or doesn’t mean anything precise. If n is five and s is, , 9/7 plus 4/3, what does it mean to raise five to that complex power? , if you actually ask what exactly do you get, then you typically only receive some ambiguous answer from the analysts or the number theorists, and so that  renders this thing  necessarily not a proper function. We're almost immediately dealing with something which doesn’t really make sense. And then, when we attempt to  add up all of these things or extend our arithmetic from the finite sums and finite products and so on that we're used to, to some  infinite domain as suggested by this, then we're just magnifying those problems. One of the aims here is to find some alternative way of thinking about arithmetic so that we don’t have to always be invoking these essentially nonsensical appeals to doing an infinite number of things.

We want to reinterpret the current understanding so that it can be expressed in a way that a computer can understand and work with explicitly, concretely. So, one of the interesting and appealing aspects of box arithmetic is that there's  this natural layering of things, a  natural way of going from one step to the next step lower down which is more complicated. That involves the objects that we’re talking about, like zeros and natural numbers and poly numbers and multi-numbers, etc. But it also includes the operations, starting with addition, then multiplication, then the carrot operation, and further products that we haven’t talked much at all about. Today the carrot operation is going to play an important role. We want to bring that forward a little bit and emphasize that this is not some obscure  thing; it's actually really very important for fundamental arithmetic but also for applications to number theory.

Okay, so let me just review some things and introduce a slight variant to things that we already know about. So, we know that a natural number is a box of zeros. Zero is just an empty box. There’s a zero; there's a zero. Now, here's a box with two zeros in it—that's what we think of as being the number two. Here’s a box with one zero in it—that's what we think of as being the number one.

Okay, that’s very familiar, I hope. Let’s introduce a slight variant of that which is particularly useful when we are thinking about the carrot operation. So, a natural star number—this is a new definition, and whether it should be like this or maybe natural to the star, I won’t fuss around too much about what the actual terminology is. We’ll just loosely talk about it this way for now. What this thing is, is a non-empty box of zeros. So, when we’re talking about natural numbers, this thing here qualifies as a natural number because it’s a box of zeros which happens to be empty.

When we go to nat star, we want to exclude the zero. We want to start counting from one: 1, 2, 3. Here we’re counting from 0, 1, 2, 3. So, in mathematics, there’s this dichotomy about whether in a given situation you should start counting with zero or start counting with one, and in different situations, either of those could be maybe more apt, more convenient. What we’re doing here is just introducing some alternate notation so that in those cases where it’s more convenient to count starting with one, that we have some pre-existing notation for that. That’s nat star.

And then, when we go down a level to poly, I remind you that a poly is a box of natural numbers, natural numbers in this sense here. Let’s define poly star to be a box of natural star numbers. A poly star is like a poly except that when you look inside the box at the natural numbers that are appearing in there, you don’t find any zeros. Okay, so that’s a poly star. Okay, so let’s have a look at poly star. All right, these are poly numbers that don’t have any zeros inside them.

Here’s a and here is b. These are both poly star numbers. It’s a box of natural numbers. You recognize this is the natural number one, this is the natural number one, this is the natural number three. Here’s the natural number one, here’s the natural number two. These are both boxes of natural numbers, but they’re natural star numbers because there are no zeros in these boxes.

In other words, there are no empty boxes by themselves as elements. Let me just remind you about the basic three operations. Addition is just dumping all the entries into a new box. A plus b is just this thing here in the obvious fashion. A times B, the way we get that is we form all possible combinations of an element in A and an element in B and we add those two elements. If we add this and this, we get this.

This and this, we get this. This and this, we get this. This and this, we get this. This and this, we get this. And this and this, we get this. Okay, so that’s the product of these two boxes.

And then we have the carrot operation. Okay, so the carrot of two boxes is the box you get by taking elements in A and elements in B and now multiplying them. Okay, multiplying them, not adding them as we did for the multiplication. This times this, well, this is one and this is one, so one times one is one. And one times two is two. And one times one is one.

And one times two is two. And three times one is three. And three times two is six. There is the carrot of a and b. And let’s just remind ourselves that we have a  distributive property. First of all, both these properties are commutative and both of them are associative.

But what about distributivity? Well, both of them are distributive with respect to addition. A times b plus c is a times b plus a times c. And also A carrot B plus C equals A carrot B plus A carrot C. So, in terms of doing algebra, we might say, okay, in this domain of just poly stars, we could look at the familiar operations of addition and multiplication, and that would give us the usual polynomial algebra that we've been thinking about since, , at least high school. But we could also do something that we’re much less familiar with.

We could look at an algebra formed by considering addition and the carrot operation because the carrot operation and the addition are related in this nice way via this distributive law. And we have commutativity and associativity of both operations. So, , that’s a very natural thing to think about: what happens, what does that look like, that  algebra structure? All right, so we can ask ourselves, what does this plus-carrot algebra of poly star look like? But before we do that, let me answer a natural question, which is why are we considering poly star instead of just poly? Because, after all, the carrot operation works on polys just as well as it does on poly stars.

Well, here’s the answer. Suppose you have this poly times this poly. Okay, the way we multiply them, we just take all possible sums. Zero plus zero is zero. Zero plus two is two. One plus zero is one.

And one plus two is three. And three plus zero is three. And three plus two is five. Fine. And now suppose we look at the carrot of these two things. Now we have to multiply things.

Zero times zero is zero. Zero times two is zero. One times zero is zero. One times two is two. Three times zero is zero. And three times two is six.

Well, we see that these two zeros here, because we’re doing a lot of multiplications, mean that we’re getting a lot more zeros at the next stage. And if we took this thing here and multiplied it by some other poly with a zero in it, then the result would have even more zeros. These zeros  reproduce like rabbits, , and it’s not so interesting. It’s just not so interesting. It’s for that reason that we’re going to restrict ourselves in this little world here just to poly stars so that all our poly numbers start with ones, if anything, there are no zeros. For example, let’s do a bit of arithmetic here.

Let’s take the poly star 1 2 3 and carrot it with itself. We look at all possible products. One times one is one. One times two is two. One times three is three. Two times one is two.

Two times two is four. Two times three is six. Three times one is three. Three times two is six. Three times three is nine. We get this box here.

And we could a little bit more efficiently describe that by not repeating all the repetitions, but just recording how many of each of the things there are. There’s one one, so we don’t need to say anything, but there’s two twos, so beside the two, we’ll put a little two to the left. Okay, it means  like two of them. And there’s two threes, so we’ll put a little two to the left and below the three. There’s one four, there’s one six, and there’s one nine. This is a little bit more efficient way of describing that same result.

Now, if we were going to go down this road, we could be a little bit more efficient. What we’re really doing here is recording the various multiplicities that the various possible natural numbers that are allowed, namely 1 2 3 4 etc., are appearing with. Okay, so another way of doing this a bit more systematically is to just list all the natural numbers from 1 to 9 in this case and record for each one of them the multiplicity that we're getting with this thing here. There’s one one, there’s two twos, there’s two threes, there’s one four, there’s zero fives, there’s one six, there’s zero sevens, there’s zero eights, there’s one nine. And when we do that, we see that essentially another way of thinking about this box is in terms of this list of multiplicities. Okay, it's a list now because it’s ordered because we’re using the fact that our natural numbers are naturally ordered, starting with one, in this case, our natural star numbers, 1 2 3 4 etc.

It makes sense to just record the multiplicity, right? We don’t really need to repeat these numbers here. We know what they are by their positions. We just record 1 2 2 1 0 1 0 0 1. And from this, if we wanted to know what the multiplicity of five is, we go 1 2 3 4 5. Ah, there’s zero fives.

And how many sixes are there? 1 2 3 4 5 6. There’s one six, etc. Okay, so this is actually quite an important thing that we have a multiset on one hand. This multiset here, which is unordered, has repetitions, can be alternately encoded by a multiplicity list, which is now a list in the sense that it’s ordered and repetitions are allowed. This accords with our general ls, lists, ord sets, multisets, sets  notation.

We’re using square brackets to denote lists, like a computer scientist would. Okay, so a little bit more formally now, let’s officially introduce the idea of the multiplicity list or M list of a poly star. The multiplicity list or m list of the poly star p. Here it is written in the form where we're recording the number of ones. There’s a1 ones, there’s a2 twos, there’s a3 threes, all the way up to say a sub k k's. This is a poly star because there are no zeros.

Okay, so that’s a box. It’s an unordered collection where repetitions are allowed. And now what we’re going to do is introduce this other data structure, which is a list where we just record the numbers or the multiplicities of all of the natural numbers in order, 1 2 3 all the way up to wherever we’re going. We record a1 a2 a3 all the way up to a sub k. Let’s call that M of P, the multiplicity list of P. P is a poly star.

This is something a little bit different, although it’s pretty well equivalent to this, right? But it’s in the form of a list or equivalently a vector, pretty well the same thing. The entries here are going to be, well, in this case, natural numbers, but including zero, right? It’s certainly possible for the number of threes to be zero. This thing is going to have zeros in it. This thing doesn’t have zeros.

And it’s also usual to  allow this convention to be flexible about the end, . So, , if the last entry here had happened to be zero, well, , we could in principle get rid of that. We'll allow ourselves to append zeros or remove zeros at the end and regard those things as being equal. That makes the addition operation on poly stars  transferable to the vector world, right? Where if you allow the vectors to have more entries, if we’re adding a vector with five entries and a vector with seven entries, we just think of padding that vector with five entries with the two additional zeros, and then they have the same size, and then we just add component-wise. Okay, so now let’s introduce what we call the carrot convolution of M lists.

What we’re going to do here is we’re going to transfer the carrot operation, which is on poly stars, to a corresponding operation on the associated multiplicity lists. There's a correspondence between these poly stars and these multiplicity lists. If we know the poly star, we know the multiplicity list. If we know the multiplicity list, then we can recover the poly star. They're completely equivalent. But over here in the poly star world, we have this operation of carrot.

We can just define the operation over here in the world of lists or vectors to be the corresponding thing. Formally, if p, q, and r are poly stars, let’s say with p carrot q equals r, then we’ll define m of p convolution m of q to be m of r. Here’s the multiplicity list of P. Here’s the multiplicity list of Q. We’re going to define this operation to be what it has to be in order to get M of R so that the convolution here exactly corresponds with the carrot operation in the world of poly stars. Let’s see what this looks like.

Here is a poly star, 1 1 3. Here’s another poly star, 1 2 2, and we’re going to carrot them. That means take all possible products. One times one is one. One times two is two. One times two is two.

One times one is one. One times two is two. One times two is two. Three times one is three. Three times two is six. Three times two is six.

Okay, in terms of multiplicities. Another way of  thinking about this is to record the multiplicities that the various numbers involved come with. The numbers involved here are from the range one to three, so we can record this thing as being two ones, zero twos, and one three. We can record this thing as being a single one, two twos, and zero threes. And over here, I guess we have two ones, one two, four twos, a single three, there are no fours, there are no fives, and there are two sixes. Okay, so at the level of the multiplicity lists, the multiplicity list for this would be 2 0 1.

The multiplicity list for this is 1 2 0. Okay, but that zero at the end, we've agreed, it's not really necessary, so it's the same as just 1 2. According to this definition, the convolution of this m list and this m list should be the multiplicity list for this thing, which is 2 4 1 0 0 2. Right, so we’ve defined an algebraic structure, essentially, on vectors, coming from the fact that we can identify these vectors with poly stars. And over in the poly star world, we have the carrot operation, so we're just bringing the carrot operation into the world of vectors where it’s a little bit less familiar. Let’s see what’s actually involved.

Maybe i'll do it at this stage here. Let's say we had to find the carrot of these two things, right? How many ones are going to be in the result? Well, how do you get a one? We’re talking about taking an element here and an element here and multiplying them. One times one is one, so that’s the only way we’re going to get a one over on this side.

And how many ones are there here? Well, there's two of them. And how many ones are there here? Well, there's one of them. How many possible products are we going to be able to make that result in a one over here? Well, there’s two of them here, there’s one there, so we can do this one times this one or this one times this one.

There's two times one, which is two possible ways of getting that. How about two? We can get two by multiplying one by two or two by one. This combination here, one times two, we can do that in two times two possible ways. Okay, multiplicity here is two, the multiplicity here is two. There are two choices here, there are two choices here, so the possible ways of pairing them up is two times two.

That's four. And the other way was two times one. Well, there's zero twos over here and only one. There’s no way of getting a two from that combination. This two is being obtained with multiplicity four. And that’s because that four is coming from the product of this multiplicity two with this multiplicity two.

We can go through the else. Let me do the six. Okay, how can we get a six? Well, you get a six by either multiplying a two on over here times a three over here, but there are no ways of doing that, or by multiplying a three over here with a two over here, and there are one times two, two ways of doing that. That’s what this carrot convolution  looks like at the level of the actual m lists or vectors or multiplicity lists. Okay, so let's have a look at another example to get us used to how this carrot convolution works at the level of these multiplicity lists.

Here’s a multiplicity list, 2 1 3, and here’s another one, 0 1 4, and we’re taking the carrot convolution of them. And I'm claiming that we get this multiplicity list. Okay, so to try to explain that, let’s just step back one step and convert it again just to boxes. This is the multiplicity list of an m set which has ones, twos, and threes, and there are two ones, one two, and three threes. This one here is an M set with zero ones, one two, and four threes. Okay, so when we take the carrot of those two things, we can get any number from one up to nine, all possible products.

Okay, so how are we going to get a one? Only by taking a one here and multiplying it by a one here. But there are two of these over here and there are zero over there, so there's no such product that will contribute to a one there. That's going to be zero, which is the product of this two and that zero. How about two? We can get a product of two by taking a one times a two or a two times a one.

If we take a one times a two, there's two ones over here and one two over here, so there are two ways of actually doing that product: one times two or the other one times two. There's two twos coming from that combination. And there's also a possibility of a two times a one, but there are zero ones over there, so one times zero is zero. There's a total of two ways there. How about three? How can we get three?

We can get three by taking a one here and a three there, and there are two times four ways of doing that. Eight possible ways because the other way, a three and a one, is not possible because there aren’t any ones. How about four? We can get a four only by multiplying two by two, and there’s one times one, one way of doing that. There’s no way of getting a five as a product. How about six?

We can get six by multiplying a two times a three, and there’s one times four ways of doing that, so four ways of doing that. Or by multiplying a three over here times a two over there, and there's three times one, three ways of doing that, for a total of seven ways of getting six. Can’t get a seven, can’t get an eight, and to get a nine we have to take a three times a three, and there’s three times four ways, twelve. Then we run through the multiplicity list. Here it is right there: 0 2 8 1 0 7 0 0 12. Okay, what’s the general rule just at the level of multiplicity lists?

We have one sequence a_n, just the elements in the list starting from one, a_1, a_2, a_3, etc., up to some a_k. And then in the second one we have b_1, b_2, up to b_l. When we’re convolving them, we're going to get another sequence as a result, c_1, c_2, up to, well, the maximum possible is k times l because that's the maximum possible product that you’re going to be able to get. And what is this c_n in terms of the a's and the b's? Here's the critical formula: the m-th one. C_m is obtained by asking, well, how can we get an m?

How can we get an m? We can get an m by choosing any two numbers that multiply to m, okay? Any two factors that multiply to m and seeing how many of them there are on this side and on this side and multiplying those multiplicities. If there are, say, a_i i’s and b_j j’s, and i times j is m, then we're going to get a contribution from those which is just the product of a_i times b_j, but we have to sum over all possible ways of writing that m as a product of i times j. That’s what we've been doing here. Okay, so this is a basic important formula that defines what’s usually called the Dirichlet convolution, but we're calling it the carrot convolution because it's in a different  context.

This is a more elementary arithmetic; the analytic number theory is actually far away. We're just talking about basic arithmetic with very fundamental things. Okay, so in the last slide here, I want to come full circle, and I want to connect this with the Dirichlet series that I told you about in our first slide, coming from number theory. And it’s a chance for us to zoom out a little bit and think about mathematical notation. Okay, so actually what I'm going to say now I think is quite interesting. It’s a little bit subtle.

Okay, so we have these  two algebraic worlds that we're  comparing here. There's the poly number world, where we have polys and the operations of interest are the usual familiar ones of addition and multiplication. Let me just remind you about that. Okay, so here is a poly, 0 1 4 4 4. And one way of describing that is it's two times this box plus this box plus three times this box. And in this world, we’ve formally brought in this  notation to make things a little bit easier and also to align with the usual polynomial algebra.

We said, let’s define this thing here to be one. In some sense, this is the first poly number which is not a natural number, the first thing that you get when you go up one level or down one level from numbers to poly numbers. We defined alpha to be this particular poly number. And then something like this one here, we saw that that was just the product of alpha with itself four times: alpha times alpha times alpha times alpha. It was reasonable to use this  exponential notation that we’re already familiar with to describe this thing here. Right, so we had this is like two times one or two, just two.

This is alpha, and this is three times alpha to four. Okay, so this is the familiar s of poly number language that I've used in many different situations. Let me just suggest to you a slightly different take on this, okay? A slightly different take. An alternative is to describe this thing here in this form, which is a little bit more verbose, to say, well, it's two alpha to the zero plus one alpha to the one plus three alpha to the four. Okay, where this symbol alpha to the n, where n is a natural number, is just a symbol for the poly number with the single entry n.

We could imagine, , talking to some people who, some students from a different culture, who are not at all used to our particular notation for arithmetical operations, . They've never seen an exponential, for example. Right, so to them something like alpha with an n on the top right is  arbitrary,  like if I wrote an alpha with an n on the top left. You'd think, well, what's that supposed to mean? Okay, but from that point of view, what we're doing here is saying, look, let’s just agree that instead of using this terminology for this box, we'll use this terminology. We're not assuming that  what an exponential is.

Okay, that's not what we're doing. We’re just saying, let’s just introduce this particular combination of symbols to represent this thing here. And then if they ask, well, what is alpha now? The answer is, well, it's just a symbol. It's just a letter that we're using conveniently  to give the n something to sit on, right? We know from this point of view alpha is not actually equal to this thing here.

In fact, this thing here is not equal to alpha. It's equal to alpha to the one. It’s equal to alpha to the one. And this thing here is not equal to one. This is equal to alpha to the zero. From that point of view, these objects are all of the form alpha to the n.

You have to have an exponent to bring one of these things into being. The question of what is the box alpha is meaningless. There is no box alpha from this point of view. Okay, so it’s an alternative to what we're usually doing, and you can see that's, in some sense, a little bit more consistent because we’re not treating this case and this case  specially. See, over here, all subsequent ones had actual exponents, but this one doesn't have an exponent. And here there’s not even an alpha because we're  used to it, right?

But in some sense, this is  more logical. The Babylonians would probably prefer this because we’re completely consistent right from the beginning. Okay, so having said that, let’s now apply the same  thinking to the poly star world, where we're interested in these two operations, addition and the carrot operation. Okay, so here is a poly star. It has to start with or not start with, but it can’t have any zeros. 1 1 1 2 5 5.

Now we've seen that another way of representing this thing is with its multiplicity list. There's three ones, there’s one two, there’s zero threes, there’s zero fours, and there’s two fives. Okay, but in the same spirit as over here, here might be an alternative way of expressing, or more maybe more concisely or just an alternate way of expressing this poly star. Okay, so let’s write it as three times one to the r plus one times two to the r plus two times five to the r. Now, I could also write this in vector notation. So, , if I was doing it in this fashion here, this one to the r would really represent the vector one, 1 0 0 0 0.

And this two to the r would really represent the vector 0 1 0 0 0. And this five to the r would really represent the vector 0 0 0 0 0 1. Okay, so in some sense these things here are just representing  basis vectors in this linear world of the multiplicity lists. And so you can say, well, okay, but what is the r? What do we mean by to the r? Is that an exponentiation?

No, it’s not an exponentiation. It’s just a symbol that we’ve introduced exactly in parallel to this one here, but it's a symbol which naturally and pleasantly accords with our usual arithmetic. Because over here, when we do the carrot operation and we are multiplying two guys in here, then this exponentiation naturally fits with that. And so if you have two to the r times three to the r, you're going to get six to the r. You have to multiply the base over here. If you have alpha to the two and alpha to the three and you’re multiplying them, you have to add the two and the three.

Okay, adding is  where the multiplication is coming from. The carrot is coming from the multiplying the interior objects. Now, you might say, oh, well, an alternative to this is to just introduce a different symbol and  make a fraction and put these powers of one, two, three, etc. down in the denominators. And so you could do that. We could also have said, well, instead of writing this, let’s write this.

The advantage in doing either this or this is that when we want to do this carrot convolution, it just ends up being ordinary multiplication in the usual sense of our familiar operations with objects like this, just using the ordinary laws of algebra. And why do number theorists want to put things in the denominator? Well, it’s exactly because they’re interested in convergence. Like in the Riemann zeta function, they’re interested in having a series so that when you actually plug in a value of s, okay, that you’re going to get something which converges. For us, that’s not so important because we don’t believe in, , the convergence or otherwise of infinite series. For us, it’s actually more natural just to use this.

This is a  a simplified version of the Dirichlet series where we’re not putting things in the denominators. We don’t need denominators. We can just have powers of one and two and five, etc. as  symbols which represent the various multiplicities of these basis vectors. What i’m saying here is that the usual dirichlet series and the dirichlet convolution or product is, in some sense, just an elementary and very reasonable constituent of box arithmetic once we’ve gone from the addition and multiplication levels down to the carrot operation. Okay, and we're just introducing the carrot into the world of poly numbers and having a look at how it interacts with addition.

And there’s an algebra structure, and we’re just describing that algebra structure. It's, in fact, very natural. It's not impossible on some other planet they learned about this in primary school. I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.