# Multiplicative functions and Dirichlet series via Boxes ｜ Math Foundations 242 ｜ N J Wildberger

[Music] Good day everyone, I'm Norman Wildberger, and we're talking about box arithmetic and applying it to number theory, particularly the Euler product formula for the zeta function and associated things. For us, the central object here is what we call the fundamental identity of arithmetic, which is an identity involving boxes and the caret operation. We've shown how to take that identity and use it to cook up variants of the Euler product. I want to go further by talking a little more about multiplicative functions and then applying them to the situation. Perhaps in the next video, we'll bring in Dirichlet series into the story. We're touching base with some pretty fundamental and important ideas from number theory, but perhaps in a somewhat novel combinatorial way.

The fundamental identity of arithmetic is this one here: here is the box of powers of two, then powers of three, then powers of five, carrying on over primes. We're taking the caret of all these boxes, and on the right-hand side, we have the box consisting of all the natural numbers. What we saw last time is that if you take an integer n, then you can raise everything to the nth power and still get an identity involving boxes and their carets. Here we've just taken all of these and raised them to the nth power, raised all of these to the nth power, and so on, and on the right-hand side, raised the natural numbers to the nth power. Then we saw that to connect with the Euler product, we apply this sum operator which takes one of these boxes and adds up all the elements in the box. The sum of all these elements, then times the sum of all these elements, times the sum of all these elements, etc.

That should, in some sense, be equal to the sum of all of these. When n is a natural number like five, it appears that none of these things make immediate sense. But if n is a negative number like minus five, then these sums here, according to classical analysts, converge. They don't actually converge to me because I'm not allowing infinite arithmetical processes, but nevertheless, the standard story is that if you took n to be say minus eight, then you would get a legitimate identity, and that's essentially the Euler product. The crucial thing here is the multiplicative aspect of this taking powers operation. We want to exploit that and investigate multiplicative functions more generally so we can cook up variants to this important example.

What made the previous example work is the multiplicative property of taking a power, that a * b to the n is equal to a to the n * b to the n for general natural numbers a and b. This motivates us to define the following: a strongly multiplicative function from the natural numbers to the natural numbers, or perhaps from the natural numbers to the integers, is a function that satisfies this basic property that f of a * b equals f of a * f of b. For example, raising a number to the nth power is an example of a strongly multiplicative function. Somewhat weaker than that is just the notion of a multiplicative function. It’s the same story, we have the same condition that f of a * b equals f of a * f of b, but now we require only that it works when the numbers a and b are relatively prime natural numbers, in other words, when they don't have any common factors, their gcd (greatest common divisor) is one. This is a weaker condition, meaning there are going to be more of these multiplicative functions than there are strongly multiplicative functions.

It will turn out that just multiplicative functions are enough for us to make this story work, and it's pleasant because there are actually quite a lot of really interesting multiplicative functions that play an important role in number theory, even in classical number theory. Let’s talk about some important multiplicative functions. One of them is the Möbius function, which is very simple. A natural number is sent to either one, minus one, or zero. It’s sent to zero if it has a squared prime factor in it, in other words, if one of the primes in its prime decomposition appears with an exponent greater than one. For example, 12 has 2 squared as a factor, so μ(12) will be zero.

If the number does not have any squared prime factors, meaning all the primes that appear in the expansion of this number into prime factors are distinct, then μ(n) is one if there's an even number of such prime factors, and it's minus one if there are an odd number of prime factors. It's not too hard to see that this is a multiplicative function, and it plays a big role in number theory. It’s not actually going to be so important for us for what we're doing today, but it will figure importantly when we start talking about Dirichlet series in a lecture or so. Another one, the Euler totient function φ(n), is the number of natural numbers k less than n which are relatively prime to n, in other words, which don’t have any common factor with n. For example, φ(7) is six because all the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, all the natural numbers less than seven, are relatively prime to seven because seven is a prime. φ(8), on the other hand, well, the numbers which are less than eight and relatively prime to it are 1, 3, 5, and 7, and there are four of them, so φ(8) equals 4.

The basic rule is that if p is a prime, then φ(p) = p - 1, and φ(p^k) = p^k * (p - 1). You can think about this in the following way: this is the same as p^k, which is all the numbers from 1 to p^k minus p^(k-1), which are all the multiples of p. All the multiples of p which are less than or equal to p^k are p * 1, p * 2, p * 3, etc., all the way up to p * p^(k-1), so there are p^(k-1) of them. So, you have to take them away, and all the others are relatively prime to p^k. This is an example where we see it's not strongly multiplicative because this thing here is not the k-th power of this. So, it's not strongly multiplicative, but it is multiplicative in the sense that this formula here suffices to allow you to calculate φ of any number because you just decompose this number into prime factors (assuming you can do that), and then you apply these formulas to each one of those prime factor powers.

The result will just be the product of all of those. This is the Euler totient function. It’s going to be interesting for us now to apply this Euler totient function φ to our fundamental identity of arithmetic. Here is our fundamental identity of arithmetic which you've all seen quite a lot now. I'm just expanding the natural numbers on the right-hand side a little bit because it's going to be interesting to see the values of these various things. What we're going to do is we're going to apply φ to each element here, every natural number that you see here, we're going to apply φ to it.

So, φ(1) is 1, φ(2) is 1 because that’s a prime, one less than it is 1. φ(2^2), well, that’s 2 according to the formula, that would be 2^(2-1) * (2-1), so that's 2. φ(2^3), according to the formula, that’s 2^(3-1) * (2-1), that’s 4. So, we see that we're getting powers of two here also but  staggered. φ(3) is 2, φ(3^2) is 3 * (3-1), so 3 * 2. φ(3^3) is 3^(3-1) * (3-1), which is 9 * 2 or 18, etc.

Again, we get another  geometric series, starting with two, common ratio three. The next one, φ(5), is 4. φ(5^2) will be 5 * 4 which is 20. φ(5^3), φ(5^3) is 5^(3-1) * 4, so that's 100, and so on. On the right-hand side, the φ of all of these things is this list here: φ(1) is 1, φ(2) is 1, φ(3) is 2, φ(4) is 2, φ(5) is 4, φ(6) is 2, and if we didn’t know that, φ(6), the numbers which are relatively prime to six are just one and five. Another way of getting that would be to take two and three which are relatively prime, φ(2) is 1, φ(3) is 2, therefore φ(6) has to be 1 * 2.

φ(7) is prime 6. φ(8) we've already talked about, that's 4. φ(9), that's the same as 3^2, we know that's 6. φ(10), that's the product of φ(2) and φ(5), so 1 * 4, so that's 4. φ(11) is a prime, so φ(11) is 10. φ(12), that's the product of φ(3) and φ(4), 3 and 4 are relatively prime, so the product here is 2 * 2, we get 4.

φ(13) would be 12, and so on. Now we're getting an identity of the carets of these various things. The statement is, for example, the fours that appear on the right-hand side, namely this one, this one, this one, and this one, are obtained by carting these boxes and seeing where you get fours. That amounts to how can you choose a box element here, a box element here, a box element here, and so on, so that the product of all of those is four. 1 * 1 * 4, or there's an example, or 1 * 1 * 4, that's another example, or 4 * 1 * 1, that's another example, or 2 * 2 * 1, that's another example, and I guess maybe that's all there is. That's cool.

We have an identity, and we could apply the sum operation. But on the face of it, that's not immediately interesting because these sums appear like they're all going to be divergent. But what we can do is go back and do exactly the same  thing that we did to the zeta function story. We could take this identity and say apply an nth power, still the same idea, we can apply the multiplicative function of raising something to the nth power and we're still going to get an identity exactly of the same kind. But now we just have to take all of these elements and raise them all to the nth power, all of them, and that's going to be another identity of msets or boxes. If we judiciously choose n to be a negative of a natural number, the negative of a natural number, then we can expect, at least classically, that these guys here, well the entries are getting big, and so if you raise them to a negative natural number power, you're getting something which gets smaller and smaller, so there's a chance that this thing here will converge in some  traditional sense.

The same thing will apply to each one of these things here, we're going to get geometric series, in fact. We can write down formulas for them and so we're going to get some  identity very much like an Euler product for the zeta function. But now it's quite different because instead of having the natural numbers down here, we have the totient values of the natural numbers. Let's see what  identity we get. Now what we want to do is write down formulas for the sums of the things that are in these boxes. So, all of this is the first sum, and then we multiply by this next sum, and then the next sum, etc.

We multiply them all together and we should get this sum on the right-hand side, at least in some sense. On the left-hand side, we have a product over primes. What we have is we have one. Each one of them starts with one, and then there's a geometric series. Like this one here is a geometric series that starts with (p-1)^n. This is the p = 5 case, so (p-1)^n, and then there’s, it’s just a geometric series built on that where the common ratio is p^n, or p^n in general.

1 + p^n + p^(2n) + p^(3n), etc., the geometric series. We’re taking the product over all primes, that’s what's on the left-hand side of this. On the right-hand side, we’re summing over the natural numbers k. We’re taking φ(k), those are these numbers 1, 1, 2, 2, 4, 2, etc., and we’re raising them all to the nth power. As I mentioned, maybe we have a better chance of getting something that looks  familiar to us in a convergent sense if we make n a negative integer, so maybe we set n = -m, we make this replacement. This n is replaced with -m, and then it ends up in the bottom here, so we get 1 over (p-1)^m.

This is a geometric series, so its sum will be 1 / (1 - the common ratio), which is p^n, but p^n is the same as p^-n. In the denominator here we have (p-1)^m * (1 - p^-m), we’re taking the product of all of those overall primes. Over here, we just get the sum of the φ(k)s, k running through all the natural numbers, now raised to this m power. This is a  cool formula, and if you've been following the lecture, you think, well yeah, we're just applying φ to this fundamental identity, it's not a surprise. If you've seen the derivation up till now, you say it's not a surprise, but if I just showed you this formula, showed you the Euler product formula for the zeta function, and I said, oh here, by the way, is something that's a little bit like that, a little bit different, you might not immediately twig that this is actually a relatively simple  consequence of essentially the same identity that underlies the zeta function story. It looks different, even though it has the same general form, a product over primes and a sum over natural numbers.

Here I've rewritten the formula so we can admire it, and we should ask, well yeah, but is it really true? Is it in some sense true? Can we check it somehow? Well yes we can, because here we're taking products and here we're taking sums, and although these are ongoing, the idea is that if we choose some m which is a natural number now, then we have some  convergence. We are expecting that as we carry on, we're  approaching some general value, maybe we're not approaching a real number but we can just say that as we carry both of these computations on, we should expect that they start looking close to each other. We can check that.

Let's check it with m equal to 10 so we have a reasonably big power down here so that these things go to zero reasonably quickly so that we have a better chance of convergence quickly. Let's compute this thing here. This is the product of primes p up to 20: 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, and 19. I've taken those eight products, all of this form 1 + 1 / (p-1)^10, 1 - p^-10. Of course, I haven't done it, my computer has done it, and my computer tells me that this is approximately 2.2933573 dot dot dot. On the right-hand side, we could take the sum of 1 / φ(k)^10, say k going from 1 to 13, the ones I showed you already.

My computer can calculate that also and it gets 2.2933535. Hey, so that's not bad, we've got equality up to seven decimal places, that gives us a fair amount of confidence that this is a reasonable formula. There's something magical about it because on the face of it these things are very different. Here is a product over primes and here is a sum over natural numbers and we're taking this funny  φ, the Euler totient function, to some power. It’s interesting. Now, has this been studied?

Well, I don't know actually, I haven't checked. My guess is probably number theorists know this, but maybe it's not well known. Maybe if you're a number theorist you can tell me if this is well known or not. In any case, I just want to suggest to you that this is one of many possible Euler type formulas that we could cook up without really that much work, just by taking the fundamental identity of arithmetic and applying some convenient, in this case, sequence of multiplicative functions to all the entries. That's what we did, we took the totient function and then we raised things to a power, so we actually performed two multiplicative functions on the elements of the identity. We need more multiplicative functions, so here are some more very common and important multiplicative functions coming from number theory.

I just remind you that multiplicative here doesn’t mean strongly multiplicative, so it means that when you apply one of these things to powers of a prime, you have to have a separate formula for each power, but that's enough for us to be able to apply the story to our fundamental identity. The divisor count function, where d(n) is just the number of divisors of natural number n. For example, 6 has 1, 2, 3, and 4 as divisors, and the number in this set is 4. Here’s what the function looks like for numbers 1 through 20: d(1) is 1, d(2) is 2, d(3) is 2, d(4) is 3, etc. You just have a look. The number of divisors of n.

Another  related thing is the sum of the divisor function σ(n). This is the sum of the divisors of n. In summation notation, σ(n) is the summation over d dividing n of d. A crucial property is that σ(p^k) is 1 + p + p^2 + all the way up to p^k. That’s a geometric series, so the formula is (p^(k+1) - 1) / (p - 1). If  this formula for a power of a prime, then you can pretty easily calculate σ(n) for n a natural number as long as  the prime factorization of n.

That's another multiplicative function. There's a variant to that. Somewhat more generally, we can also look at the sum of the k-th powers of the divisors of n. Σ_k(n) is the sum over all d dividing n of d^k, the sum of powers of divisors. When k is zero, you’re just counting them, and then that's really this one here. When k is one, you’re taking the ordinary sum, that's this one here.

This is a generalization of these other ones. These are all multiplicative functions, so in principle we can play the same game that we just played with the totient function for any one of them. In summary, there are lots of opportunities for cooking up Euler type product formulas with the general idea being that we start with the fundamental identity of arithmetic, namely this thing here, consisting of boxes, one associated to each prime number on the left and the box of all natural numbers on the right. Then we apply various multiplicative functions to all the elements, and then after that, we sum up the elements by applying the S operator which converts these boxes into sums, potentially numbers, and converts the carets into ordinary products. We have a product of sums for all of these boxes equaling some sum over the natural numbers of whatever it is that we're looking at. In this story, there’s a helpful tip here which is that the product of multiplicative functions is also multiplicative, so that means that you could iterate this story.

We’ve already done that once, we already applied the totient function and then we raised things to a power to try to get something that more easily converges. We can do the same  thing here, but we could in principle iterate this a number of times and apply one multiplicative function and then another and then maybe another one. We’re going to get a whole bunch of identities, and these identities are maybe interesting, they’re telling us something about the world of numbers. This is not so far from what number theorists already do, this  story is not at all far from standard classical analytic number theory. That becomes even more focused when we shift to Dirichlet series. In my next talk, I want to show you that this box arithmetic point of view becomes particularly useful when we're analyzing convolution of arithmetic functions, Dirichlet convolutions, and Dirichlet series.

Hope you'll join me for that. I'm Norman Wildberger, thanks for listening. [Music]